 
LECTURE NOTES 
ON 
EMBEDDED SYSTEMS DESIGN 
IV B. Tech I semester (R22) 
(2025-26) 
Faculty Member 
Mr. M. Ramanjaneyulu 
Associate Professor ECE 

MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY 
IV Year B.Tech. ECE-II Sem 
EMBEDDED SYSTEMS DESIGN (R22A0426) 
COURSE OBJECTIVES: 
For embedded systems, the course will enable the students to: 
1. Understand the basics of an embedded system. 
2. Program an embedded system. 
3. To learn the design process of embedded system applications. 
4. To understands the RTOS and inter-process communication. 
5. To understand different communication interfaces. 
UNIT-I 
INTRODUCTION TO EMBEDDED SYSTEMS 
Definition of Embedded System, Embedded Systems Vs General Computing Systems, 
Classification, Major Application Areas, Purpose of Embedded Systems. Characteristics of 
embedded computing applications, challenges in embedded computing system design. The 
embedded system design process-requirements, specification, architecture design, designing 
hardware and software, components, system integration. 
UNIT-II TYPICAL EMBEDDED SYSTEM 
Core of the embedded system-general purpose and domain specific processors, ASICs, PLDs, 
COTs; Memory-ROM, RAM, memory according to the type of interface, memory selection for 
embedded systems; Sensors, actuators and other components, seven segment LED, relay, piezo 
buzzer, push button switch, reset circuit, brownout protection circuit, oscillator circuit real time 
clock, watch dog timer. 
UNIT-III EMBEDDED FIRMWARE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT 
Embedded firmware design approaches-super loop based approach, operating system based 
approach; Embedded firmware development languages-assembly language based development, 
high level language based development; Programming in embedded c. 

UNIT-IV RTOS BASED EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN 
Operating system basics, types of operating systems, tasks, process and threads, multiprocessing 
and multitasking, task scheduling: non-preemptive and pre-emptive scheduling; task 
communication-shared memory, message passing. 
UNIT-V COMMUNICATION INTERFACE 
On board communication interfaces -I2C, SPI, UART,1-wire interface, parallel interface; 
External communication interfaces-RS232 and RS485, USB, infrared, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Zigbee, 
GPRS; 
TEXT BOOKS: 
1. Computers as Components –Wayne Wolf, Morgan Kaufmann (second edition). 
2. Introduction to Embedded Systems - shibu k v, Mc Graw Hill Education. 
REFERENCE BOOKS: 
1. Embedded System Design -frank vahid, tony grivargis, 
john Wiley. 
2. Embedded Systems- An integrated approach - Lyla b das, Pearson education 2012. 
3. Embedded Systems – Raj Kamal, TMH 
4. An embedded Software Primer, David e Simon, Pearson education 
COURSE OUTCOMES: 
Upon completion of this course, the students will be able to: 
1. Understand and design the embedded systems 
2. Learn the basics of OS and RTOS 
3. Understand types of memory and interfacing to external world 
4. Understand embedded firmware design approaches 
5. Understand the various types of communication interfaces 
 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
 
IV YEAR ECE 
UNIT-I 
 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems 
What is Embedded System? 
An Electronic/Electro mechanical system which is designed to perform a specific function and is 
a combination of both hardware and firmware (Software) 
E.g. Electronic Toys, Mobile Handsets, Washing Machines, Air Conditioners, Automotive 
Control Units, Set Top Box, DVD Player etc… 
Embedded Systems are: 
❑ 
❑ Unique in character and behavior 
With specialized hardware and software 
Embedded Systems Vs General Computing Systems: 
General Purpose Computing System 
Embedded System 
A system which is a combination of generic 
hardware and General Purpose Operating System 
for executing a variety of applications 
A system which is a combination of special 
purpose hardware and embedded OS for 
executing a specific set of applications 
Contain a General Purpose Operating System 
(GPOS) 
May or may not contain an operating system 
for functioning 
Applications are alterable (programmable) by 
user (It is possible for the end user to re-install the 
Operating System, and add or remove user 
applications) 
The firmware of the embedded system is 
pre-programmed and it is non-alterable by 
end-user 
Performance is the key deciding factor on the 
selection of the system. Always „Faster is Better‟ 
Application 
specific 
requirements 
(like
performance, power requirements, memory 
usage etc) are the key deciding factors 
Less/not at all tailored towards reduced operating 
power requirements, options for different levels 
of power management. 
Highly tailored to take advantage of the 
power saving modes supported by hardware 
and Operating System 
Response requirements are not time critical 
For certain category of embedded systems 
like mission critical systems, the response 
time requirement is highly critical 
Need not be deterministic in execution behavior 
Execution behavior 
is deterministic 
for
certain type of embedded systems like „Hard 
Real Time‟ systems 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
⚫ 
 History of Embedded Systems: 
➢ 
First Recognized Modern Embedded System: Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) developed by 
Cha 
rles Stark Draper at the MIT Instrumentation Laboratory. 
It has two modules 
⚫ 
1.Command module(CM) 2.Lunar Excursion 
module(LEM) 
⚫ 
RAM size 256 , 1K ,2K words 
⚫ 
ROM size 4K,10K,36K words 
⚫ 
Clock frequency is 1.024MHz 
⚫ 
5000 ,3-input RTL NOR gates are used 
⚫ 
User interface is DSKY(display/Keyboard) 
➢ 
First Mass Produced Embedded System: Autonetics D-17 Guidance computer for Minuteman-I missile 
Classification of Embedded Systems: 
❑ 
Based on Generation 
(March-2017) 
❑ 
Based on Complexity & Performance Requirements 
❑ 
Based on deterministic behavior 
❑ 
Based on Triggering 
1. Embedded Systems - Classification based on 
Generation 
First Generation: The early embedded systems built 
around 8-bit microprocessors like 8085 and Z80 and 4-bit 
microcontrollers 
EX. stepper motor control units, Digital Telephone Keypads etc. 
Second Generation: Embedded Systems built around 16-bit microprocessors and 8 or 
16-bit microcontrollers, following the first generation embedded systems 
EX.SCADA, Data Acquisition Systems etc. 
Third Generation: Embedded Systems built around high performance 16/32 bit 
Microprocessors/controllers, Application Specific Instruction set processors like Digital 
Signal Processors (DSPs), and Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs).The 
instruction set is complex and powerful. 
EX. Robotics, industrial process control, networking etc. 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Fourth Generation: Embedded Systems built around System on Chips (SoC‘s), Re- 
configurable processors and multicore processors. It brings high performance, tight 
integration and miniaturization into the embedded device market 
EX Smart phone devices, MIDs etc. 
2. Embedded Systems - Classification based on Complexity & Performance  
➢ 
Small Scale: The embedded systems built around low performance and low cost 8 or 16 
bit microprocessors/ microcontrollers. It is suitable for simple applications and where 
performance is not time critical. It may or may not contain OS. 
➢ 
Medium Scale: Embedded Systems built around medium performance, low cost 16 or 32 
bit microprocessors / microcontrollers or DSPs. These are slightly complex in hardware 
and firmware. It may contain GPOS/RTOS. 
➢ 
Large Scale/Complex: Embedded Systems built around high performance 32 or 64 bit 
RISC processors/controllers, RSoC or multi-core processors and PLD. It requires 
complex 
hardware 
and 
software. 
These 
system 
may 
contain 
multiple 
processors/controllers and co-units/hardware accelerators for offloading the processing 
requirements from the main processor. It contains RTOS for scheduling, prioritization 
and management. 
3. Embedded Systems - Classification Based on deterministic behavior: It is applicable for 
Real Time systems. The application/task execution behavior for an embedded system can be 
either deterministic or non-deterministic 
These are classified in to two types 
1. Soft Real time Systems: Missing a deadline may not be critical and can be 
tolerated to a certain degree 
2. Hard Real time systems: Missing a program/task execution time deadline can have 
catastrophic consequences (financial, human loss of life, etc.) 
4. Embedded Systems - Classification Based on Triggering: 
These are classified into two types 
1. 
Event Triggered : Activities within the system (e.g., task run-times) are dynamic and 
depend upon occurrence of different events . 
2. 
Time triggered: Activities within the system follow a statically computed schedule (i.e., 
they are allocated time slots during which they can take place) and thus by nature are 
predictable. 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
 
Major Application Areas of Embedded Systems: 
❑ 
Consumer Electronics: Camcorders, Cameras etc. 
❑ 
Household Appliances: Television, DVD players, washing machine, Fridge, Microwave Oven 
etc. 
❑ 
Home Automation and Security Systems: Air conditioners, sprinklers, Intruder detection 
alarms, Closed Circuit Television Cameras, Fire alarms etc. 
❑ 
Automotive Industry: Anti-lock breaking systems (ABS), Engine Control, Ignition Systems, 
Automatic Navigation Systems etc. 
❑ 
Telecom: Cellular Telephones, Telephone switches, Handset Multimedia Applications etc. 
❑ 
Computer Peripherals: Printers, Scanners, Fax machines etc. 
❑  
Computer Networking Systems: Network Routers, Switches, Hubs, Firewalls etc. 
❑ 
Health Care: Different Kinds of Scanners, EEG, ECG Machines etc. 
❑ 
Measurement & Instrumentation: Digital multi meters, Digital CROs, Logic Analyzers PLC 
systems etc. 
❑ 
Banking & Retail: Automatic Teller Machines (ATM) and Currency counters, Point of Sales 
(POS) 
❑ 
Card Readers: Barcode, Smart Card Readers, Hand held Devices etc. 
Purpose of Embedded Systems: 
(DEC2016) 
Each Embedded Systems is designed to serve the purpose of any one or a combination of the 
following tasks. 
o 
Data Collection/Storage/Representation 
o 
Data Communication 
o 
Data (Signal) Processing 
o 
Monitoring 
o 
Control 
o 
Application Specific User Interface 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
1. Data Collection/Storage/Representation:- 
❖ Performs acquisition of data from the externalworld. 
❖ The collected data can be either analog ordigital 
❖ Data collection is usually done for storage, 
nalysis, manipulation and transmission 
❖ The collected data may be stored directly in the system or may be transmitted to some 
other systems or it may be processed by the system or it may be deleted instantly after 
giving a meaningful representation 
2. 
Data Communication:- 
Embedded Data communication systems are deployed in applications ranging from 
complex satellite communicationsystems to simple home networking systems 
Embedded Data communication systems are dedicated for datacommunication 
The data communication can happen through a wired interface (like Ethernet, RS- 
232C/USB/IEEE1394 etc) or wireless interface (like Wi-Fi, GSM,/GPRS, Bluetooth, 
ZigBee etc) 
Network hubs, Routers, switches, Modems etc are typical examples for dedicated data 
transmission embedded systems 
3. Data (Signal) Processing:- 
Embedded systems with Signal processing functionalities are employed in applications 
demanding signal processing like Speech coding, synthesis, audio video codec, 
transmission applications etc 
Computational intensive systems 
Employs Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
4. Monitoring:- 
Embedded systems coming under this 
category are specifically designed for 
monitoring purpose 
They are used for determining the state of 
some variables using input sensors 
They cannot impose control over variables. 
Electro Cardiogram (ECG) machine for 
monitoring the heart beat of a patient is a 
typical example for this 
The sensors used in ECG are the different Electrodes connected to the patient‟s body 
Measuring instruments like Digital CRO, Digital Multi meter, Logic Analyzer etc used in 
Control & Instrumentation applications are also examples of embedded systems for 
monitoring purpose 
5. 
Control:-  
Embedded 
systems 
with 
control 
functionalities are used for imposing 
control over some variables according to 
the changes in input variables 
Embedded 
system 
with 
control 
functionality contains both sensors and 
actuators 
Sensors are connected to the input port for capturing the changes in environmental 
variable or measuring variable 
The actuators connected to the output port are controlled according to the changes in input 
variable to put an impact on the controlling variable to bring the controlled variable to the 
specified range 
Air conditioner for controlling room temperature is a typical example for embedded 
system with „Control‟ functionality 
Air conditioner contains a room temperature sensing element (sensor) which may be a 
thermistor and a handheld unit for setting up (feeding) the desired temperature 
The air compressor unit acts as the actuator. The compressor is controlled according to the 
current room temperature and the desired temperature set by the end user. 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
 
COMPLEX SYSTEM AND MICROPROCESSORS: 
➢ 
Three main tasks or components in embedded system design: 
o Selecting and integrating hardware to give computer like functionalities 
o Dumping main application software generally into flash or ROM and the application 
software performs concurrently the number of tasks. 
o Integrating with a real time operating system (RTOS), this supervises the application 
software tasks running on the hardware and organizes the accesses to system resources 
according to priorities and timing constraints of tasks in the system. 
Embedding Computers: 
➢ Whirlwind, a computer designed at MIT in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Whirlwind was also the 
first computer designed to support real-time operation and was originally conceived as a mechanism 
for controlling an aircraft simulator. It was extremely large physically compared to today‘s 
computers(e.g., it contained over 4,000 vacuum tubes). 
➢ Very-large-scale integration (VLSI) is the process of creating an integrated circuit (IC) by 
combining thousands of transistors into a single chip. VLSI began in the 1970s. A microprocessor is 
a single-chip CPU. Very large scale integration (VLSI) technology allowed us to put a complete 
CPU on a single chipsince 1970s, but those CPUs were very simple. 
In 1971 the first microprocessor the Intel 4004 invented by Ted Hoff, was designed for an 
embeddedapplication, namely, a calculator. The calculator was not a general-purpose computer—it 
merely provided basic arithmetic functions. The HP-35 was the first handheld calculator to 
perform transcendental functions. It was introduced in 1972, so it used several chips to implement 
the CPU,rather than a single-chip microprocessor. 
➢ Automobile designers started making use of the microprocessor soon after single-chip CPUs 
became available. The most important and sophisticated use of microprocessors in automobiles was 
tocontrol the engine: determining when spark plugs fire, controlling the fuel/air mixture, and so on. 
➢ Microprocessors are usually classified according to their word length. 
o An 8-bit microcontroller is designed for low-cost applications and includes on-board 
memoryand I/O devices‘ 
6. Application Specific User Interface:- 
 
Embedded systems which are designed for a specific 
application 
 
Contains Application Specific User interface (rather than 
general standard UI ) like key board, Display units etc 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
o 16-bit microcontroller is often used for more sophisticated applications that may require 
either longer word lengths or off-chip I/O and memory; 
o 32-bit RISC microprocessor offers very high performance for computation-intensive 
applications. 
➢ House Hold uses of microprocessor: 
o The typical microwave oven has at least one microprocessor to control oven operation. 
o Many houses have advanced thermostat systems, which change the temperature level at 
various times during the day. 
Characteristics of Embedded Computing Applications: 
a. Complex Algorithms 
b. User Interface 
c. Real Time 
d. Multirate 
e.Manufacturing Cost 
f. Power 
Complex algorithms: The operations performed by the microprocessor may be very sophisticated. For example, the 
microprocessor that controls an automobile engine must perform complicated filtering functions to optimize the 
performance of the car while minimizing pollution and fuel utilization. 
User interface: Microprocessors are frequently used to control complex user interfaces that may include 
multiple menus and many options. The moving maps in Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation are 
good examples of sophisticated user interfaces. 
To make things more difficult, embedded computing operations must often be performed to 
meet deadlines: 
Real time: Many embedded computing systems have to perform in real time— if the data is not ready by a 
certain deadline, the system breaks. In some cases, failure to meet a deadline is unsafe and can even endanger 
lives. In other cases, missing a deadline does not create safety problems but does create unhappy customers— 
missed deadlines in printers, for example, can result in scrambled pages. 
➢ Multirate: Not only must operations be completed by deadlines, but many embedded computing systems 
have several real-time activities going on at the same time. They may simultaneously control some 
operations that run at slow rates and others that run at high rates. Multimedia applications are prime 
examples of multirate behaviour. The audio and video portions of a multimedia stream run at very different 
rates, but they must remain closely synchronized. Failure to meet a deadline on either the audio or video 
portions spoils the perception of the entire presentation. 
Costs of various sorts are also very important: 
➢ Manufacturing cost: The total cost of building the system is very important in many cases. 
Manufacturing cost is determined by many factors, including the type of microprocessor used, the 
amount of memory required, and the types of I/O devices. 
➢ Power and energy: Power consumption directly affects the cost of the hardware, since a larger 
power supply may be necessary. Energy consumption affects battery life, which is important in many 
applications, as well as heat consumption, which can be important even in desktop applications. 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Challenges in Embedded Computing System Design:  
i. How much hardware do we need? 
ii. How do we meet deadlines? 
iii. How do we minimize power consumption? 
iv. How do we design for upgradability? 
v. Does it really work? 
vi. Complex testing 
vii. Limited observability and controllability 
viii. Restricted development environments 
External constraints are one important source of difficulty in embedded system design. Let‘s 
consider some important problems that must be taken into account in embedded system design. 
How much hardware do we need? 
We have a great deal of control over the amount of computing power we apply to our problem. We cannot 
only select the type of microprocessor used, but also select the amount of memory, the peripheral devices, 
and more. Since we often must meet both performance deadlines and manufacturing cost constraints, the 
choice of hardware is important—too little hardware and the system fails to meet its deadlines, too much 
hardware and it becomes too expensive. 
How do we meet deadlines? 
The brute force way of meeting a deadline is to speed up the hardware so that the program runs faster. 
Of course, that makes the system more expensive. It is also entirely possible that increasing the CPU 
clock rate may not make enough difference to execution time, since the program‘s speed may be 
limited by the memory system. 
How do we minimize power consumption? 
In battery-powered applications, power consumption is extremely important. Even in non battery applications, 
excessive power consumption can increase heat dissipation. One way to make a digital system consume less 
power is to make it run more slowly, slowing down the system can obviously lead to missed deadlines. 
Careful design is required to slow down the noncritical parts of the machine for power consumption while 
still meeting necessary performance goals. 
How do we design for upgradability? 
The hardware platform may be used over several product generations or for several different versions of a 
product in the same generation, with few or no changes. However, we want to be able to add features by 
changing software. 
Does it really work? 
Reliability is always important when selling products—customers rightly expect that products they buy will 
work. Reliability is especially important in some applications. If we wait until we have a running system and 
try to eliminate the bugs, we will be too late—we won‘t find enough bugs, it will be too expensive to fix 
them, and it will take more time. 
Let‘s consider some ways in which the nature of embedded computing machines makes their design more 
difficult. 
Complex testing: Exercising an embedded system is generally more difficult than typing in some data. We 
may have to run a real machine in order to generate the proper data. The timing of data is often important, 
meaning that we cannot separate the testing of an embedded computer from the machine in which it is 
embedded. 
Limited observability and controllability: Embedded computing systems usually do not come with keyboards 
and screens. This makes it more difficult to see what is going on and to affect the system‘s operation. We may 
be forced to watch the values of electrical signals on the microprocessor bus, for example, to know what is 
going on inside the system. Moreover, in real-time applications we may not be able to easily stop the system 
to see what is going on inside. 
Restricted development environments: The development environments for embedded systems (the tools used 
to develop software and hardware) are often much more limited than those available for PCs and 
workstations. 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
Embedded system design process: 
This section provides an overview of the embedded system design process aimed at two objectives. 
First, it will give us an introduction to the various steps in embedded system design before we delve into them 
in more detail. Second, it will allow us to consider the design methodology itself. A design methodology is 
important for three reasons. First, it allows us to keep a scorecard on a design to ensure that we have done 
everything we need to do, such as optimizing performance or performing functional tests. Second, it allows us 
to develop computer-aided design tools. Developing a single program that takes in a concept for an embedded 
system and emits a completed design would be a daunting task, but by first breaking the process into 
manageable steps, we can work on automating (or at least semi automating) the steps one at a time. Third, a 
design methodology makes it much easier for members of a design team to communicate. 
The below Figure summarizes the major steps in the embedded system design process. In this top– 
downview, we start with the system requirements. 
Fig: Major levels of abstraction in the design process 
Requirements: 
Clearly, before we design a system, we must know what we are designing. The initial stages of the 
design process capture this information for use in creating the architecture and components. We generally 
proceed in two phases: First, we gather an informal description from the customers known as requirements, 
and we refine the requirements into a specification that contains enough information to begin designing the 
system architecture. 
Requirements may be functional or nonfunctional. We must of course capture the basic functions of the 
embedded system, but functional description is often not sufficient. Typical nonfunctional requirements 
include: 
■ 
Performance: The speed of the system is often a major consideration both for the usability of the 
system and for its ultimate cost. As we have noted, performance may be a combination of soft performance 
metrics such as approximate time to perform a user-level function and hard deadlines by which a particular 
operation must be completed. 

■ Cost: The target cost or purchase price for the system is almost always a consideration. Cost 
typically has two major components: manufacturing cost includes the cost of components and 
assembly; nonrecurring engineering (NRE) costs include the personnel and other costs of 
designing the system. 
■ Physical size and weight: The physical aspects of the final system can vary greatly depending 
upon the application. An industrial control system for an assembly line may be designed to fit 
into a standard-size rack with no strict limitations on weight. A handheld device typically has 
tight requirements on both size and weight that can ripple through the entire system design. 
■ Power consumption: Power, of course, is important in battery-powered systems and is often 
important in other applications as well. Power can be specified in the requirements stage in terms 
of battery life—the customer is unlikely to be able to describe the allowable wattage. 
A sample requirements form that can be filled out at the start of the project. We can use the form 
as a checklist in considering the basic characteristics of the system. Let‘s consider the entries in 
the form: 
■ Name: This is simple but helpful. Giving a name to the project not only simplifies talking 
about it to other people but can also crystallize the purpose of the machine. 
■ Purpose: This should be a brief one- or two-line description of what the system is supposed to 
do. If you can‘t describe the essence of your system in one or two lines, chances are that you 
don‘t understand it well enough. 
■ Inputs and outputs: These two entries are more complex than they seem. The inputs and 
outputs to the system encompass a wealth of detail: 
— Types of data: Analog electronic signals? Digital data? Mechanical inputs? 
— Data characteristics: Periodically arriving data, such as digital audio 
samples? Occasional user inputs? How many bits per data element? 
— Types of I/O devices: Buttons? Analog/digital converters? Video displays? 
■ Functions: This is a more detailed description of what the system does. A good way to 
approach this is to work from the inputs to the outputs: When the system receives an input, what 
does it do? How do user interface inputs affect these functions? How do different functions 
interact? 
Performance: Many embedded computing systems spend at least some time controlling physical 
devices or processing data coming from the physical world. In most of these cases, the 
computations must be performed within a certain time frame. It is essential that the performance 
requirements be identified early 
since they must be carefully measured during implementation to ensure that the system works 
properly. 
■ Manufacturing cost: This includes primarily the cost of the hardware components. Even if you 
don‘t know exactly how much you can afford to spend on system components, you should have 
some idea of the eventual cost range. Cost has a substantial influence on architecture: A machine 
that is meant to 
sell at $10 most likely has a very different internal structure than a $100 system. 
■ Power: Similarly, you may have only a rough idea of how much power the system can 
consume, but a little information can go a long way. Typically, the most important decision is 
whether the machine will be battery powered or plugged into the wall. Battery-powered 
machines must be much more careful about how they spend energy. 
■ Physical size and weight: You should give some indication of the physical size of the system 
to help guide certain architectural decisions. A desktop machine has much more flexibility in the 
components used than, for example, a lapel mounted voice recorder. 

GPS MODULE: 
REQUIREMENTS FORM OF GPS MOVING MAP MODULE: 
Name : GPS moving map 
Purpose: Consumer-grade moving map for driving use 
Inputs : Power button, two control buttons 
Outputs : Back-lit LCD display 400 _ 600 
Functions : Uses 5-receiver GPS system; three user-selectable resolutions; 
always displays current latitude and longitude 
Performance: Updates screen within 0.25 seconds upon movement 
Manufacturing cost:$30 
Power: 100mW 
Physical size and weight: No more than 2” _ 6, ” 12 ounces 
Specification 
The specification is more precise—it serves as the contract between the customer and the 
architects. As such, the specification must be carefully written so that it accurately reflects the 
customer‘s requirements and does so in a way that can be clearly followed during design. 
The specification should be understandable enough so that someone can verify that it meets 
system requirements and overall expectations of the customer. 
A specification of the GPS system would include several components: 
▪ Data received from the GPS satellite constellation. 
▪ Map data. 
▪ User interface. 
▪ Operations that must be performed to satisfy customer requests. 
▪ Background actions required to keep the system running, such as operating the GPS 
receiver. 

Architecture Design 
The specification does not say how the system does things, only what the system does. 
Describing how the system implements those functions is the purpose of the architecture. The 
architecture is a plan for the overall structure of the system that will be used later to design the 
components that make up the architecture. The creation of the architecture is the first phase of 
what many designers think of as design. 
This block diagram is still quite abstract—we have not yet specified which operations will be 
performed by software running on a CPU, what will be done by special-purpose hardware, and 
so on. The diagram does, however, go a long way toward describing how to implement the 
functions described in the specification. We clearly see, for example, that we need to search the 
topographic database and to render (i.e., draw) the results for the display. We have chosen to 
separate those functions so that we can potentially do them in parallel—performing rendering 
separately from searching the database may help us update the screen more fluidly. 
FIG: BLOCK DIAGRAM FOR THE MOVING MAP 
The hardware block diagram clearly shows that we have one central CPU surrounded by memory 
and I/O devices. In particular, we have chosen to use two memories: a frame buffer for the pixels 
to be displayed and a separate program/data memory for general use by the CPU. The software 
block diagram fairly closely follows the system block diagram, but we have added a timer to 
control when we read the buttons on the user interface and render data onto the screen. To have a 
truly complete architectural description, we require more detail, such as where units in the 
software block diagram will be executed in the hardware block diagram and when operations 
will be performed in time. 

 
Fig : Hardware and software architectures for the moving map. 
The architectural description tells us what components we need. The component design effort 
builds those components in conformance to the architecture and specification. The components 
will in general include both hardware—FPGAs, boards, and so on—and software modules. Some 
of the components will be ready-made. The CPU, for example, will be a standard component in 
almost all cases, as will memory chips and many other components .In the moving map, the GPS 
receiver is a good example of a specialized component that will nonetheless be a predesigned, 
standard component. We can also make use of standard software modules. 
System Integration: 
Only after the components are built do we have the satisfaction of putting them together and 
seeing a working system. Of course, this phase usually consists of a lot more than just plugging 
everything together and standing back. Bugs are typically found during system integration, and 
good planning can help us find the bugs quickly. By building up the system in phases and 
running properly chosen tests, we can often find bugs more easily. If we debug only a few 
modules at a time, we are more likely to uncover the simple bugs and able to easily recognize 
them. Only by fixing the simple bugs early will we be able to uncover the more complex or 
obscure bugs that can be identified only by giving the system a hard workout 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
o The modern camera is a prime example of the powerful features that can be added under 
microprocessor control. 
o Digital Television uses embedded processors 
DESIGN EXAMPLE: 
BMW 850i brake and stability control system 
The BMW 850i was introduced with a sophisticated system for controlling the wheels of the car. 
An antilock brake system (ABS) reduces skidding by pumping the brakes. An automatic stability control 
(ASC _ T) system intervenes with the engine during maneuvering to improve the car‘s stability. 
These systems actively control critical systems of the car; as control systems, they require inputs from and 
output to the automobile. 
Let‘s first look at the ABS. The purpose of an ABS is to temporarily release the brake on a wheel when it 
rotates too slowly—when a wheel stops turning, the car starts skidding and becomes hard to control. 
It sits between the hydraulic pump, which provides power to the brakes, and the brakesthemselves as seen 
in the below diagram. The ABS system uses sensors on each wheel to measure the speed of the wheel. The 
wheel speeds are used by the ABS system to determine how to vary the hydraulic fluid pressure to prevent 
the wheels from skidding. 
➢ 
The ASC _ T system‘s job is to control the engine power and the brake to improve the car‘s 
stability. The ASC _ T controls four different systems: throttle, ignition timing, differential brake, and (on 
automatic transmission cars) gear shifting. 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
SUMMARY 
1. An embedded system is an electronic/electromechanical system designed to perform a 
specific function and is a combination of both hardware and firmware (software). 
2. A general purpose computing system is a combination of generic hardware and general 
purpose operating system for executing a variety of applications, whereas an embedded 
3. System is a combination of special purpose hardware and embedded OS/firmware for 
executing a specific set of applications. 
4. Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) is the first recognized modern embedded system and 
Autonetics D-17, the guidance computer for the Minuteman-I missile, was the first mass 
produced embedded system. 
5. Based on the complexity and performance requirements, embedded systems are classified 
into small-scale, medium-scale and large-scale/complex. 
6. The presences of embedded system vary from simple electronic system toys to complex 
flight and missile control systems. 
7. Embedded systems are designed to serve the purpose of any one or combination of data 
collection/storage/representation, data processing, monitoring, control or application 
specific user interface. 
8. Wearable devices refer to embedded systems which are incorporated into accessories and 
apparels. It envisions the bonding of embedded technology in our day to day lives. 
OBJECTIVE QUESTIONS 
1. Embedded systems are 
(a) General Purpose 
(b) Special Purpose 
2. Embedded system is 
(a) An electronic system 
(b) A pure mechanical system 
(c)An electro-mechanical system (d) (a) or (c) 
3. Which of the following is not true about embedded systems? 
(a) Built around specialized hardware 
(b) Always contain an operating system 
(c)Execution behavior may be deterministic (d) All of these (e) none of these 
4. Which of the following is not an example of small scale embedded system? 
(a) Electronic Barbie doll 
(b) Simple calculator 
(c) Cell Phone 
(d) Electronic toy car 

 
ESD UNIT-1 NOTES 
 
 
5. The first recognized modern embedded system is 
(a) Apple computer 
(b) Apollo Guidance Computer 
(c) Calculator 
(d) Radio navigation system 
6. The first mass produced embedded system is 
(a) Minuteman-I 
(b) Minuteman-II 
(c) Autonetics D17 
(d) Apollo Guidance Computer 
7. Which of the following is (are) an intended purpose of embedded systems? 
(a) Data collection 
(b) Data processing 
(c) Data communication 
(d) All of these 
(e) None of these 
8. Which of the following is an example of an embedded system for data communication? 
(a) USB mass storage device 
(b) Network router 
(c) Digital camera 
(d)Music player 
(e) All of these 
(f) None of these 
9. A digital multimeter is an example of embedded system for 
(a) Data communication 
(b) Monitoring 
(c) Control 
(d) All of these 
(e) None of these 
10. Which of the following is an example of an embedded system for signal processing? 
(a) Apple iPOD 
(b) Sandisk USB mass storage device 
(c) both a and b 
(d) None of these 
Reference Text Books:- 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill 
2. Computers as Components –Wayne Wolf-morgan Kaufmann publications 

IV ECE 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN 
UNIT-II 
TYPICAL EMBEDDED 
SYSTEM 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
ELEMENTS OF EMBEDDED SYSTEMS: 
An embedded system is a combination of 3 things, Hardware Software Mechanical 
Components and it is supposed to do one specific task only. A typical embedded system contains 
a single chip controller which acts as the master brain of the system. Diagrammatically an 
embedded system can be represented as follows: 
FPGA/ASIC/DSP/SoC 
Microprocessor/controller 
 
Embedded 
Firmware 
Memory 
Communication Interface 
System 
I/p Ports 
Core 
O/p Ports 
(Sensors) 
(Actuators) 
Other supporting 
Integrated Circuits & 
subsystems 
Embedded System 
Real World 
Embedded systems are basically designed to regulate a physical variable (such 
Microwave Oven) or to manipulate the state of some devices by sending some signals to the 
actuators or devices connected to the output port system (such as temperature in Air 
Conditioner), in response to the input signal provided by the end users or sensors which are 
connected to the input ports. Hence the embedded systems can be viewed as a reactive 
system. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
The control is achieved by processing the information coming from the sensors and user 
interfaces and controlling some actuators that regulate the physical variable. 
Keyboards, push button, switches, etc. are Examples of common user interface input 
devices and LEDs, LCDs, Piezoelectric buzzers, etc examples for common user interface 
output devices for a typical embedded system.The requirement of type of user interface 
changes from application to application based on domain. 
Some embedded systems do not require any manual intervention for their operation. 
They automatically sense the input parameters from real world through sensors which are 
connected at input port. The sensor information is passed to the processor after signal 
conditioning and digitization. The core of the system performs some predefined operations 
on input data with the help of embedded firmware in the system and sends some actuating 
signals to the actuator connect connected to the output port of the system. 
The memory of the system is responsible for holding the code (control algorithm and 
other important configuration details). There are two types of memories are used in any 
embedded system. Fixed memory (ROM) is used for storing code or program. The user 
cannot change the firmware in this type of memory. The most common types of memories 
used 
in 
embedded 
systems 
for 
control 
algorithm 
storage 
are 
OTP,PROM,UVEPROM,EEPROM and FLASH 
An embedded system without code (i.e. the control algorithm) implemented memory has 
all the peripherals but is not capable of making decisions depending on the situational as well 
as real world changes. 
Memory for implementing the code may be present on the processor or may be 
implemented as a separate chip interfacing the processor 
In a controller based embedded system, the controller may contain internal memory for 
storing code such controllers are called Micro-controllers with on-chip ROM, eg. Atmel 
AT89C51. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
The Core of the Embedded Systems: The core of the embedded system falls into anyone 
of the following categories. 
❑ 
General Purpose and Domain Specific Processors 
o Microprocessors 
o 
Microcontrollers 
o 
Digital Signal Processors 
❑ 
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs) 
❑ Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) 
❑ Commercial off the shelf Components (COTS) 
GENERAL PURPOSE AND DOMAIN SPECIFIC PROCESSOR: 
Almost 80% of the embedded systems are processor/ controller based. 
The processor may be microprocessor or a microcontroller or digital signal processor, 
depending on the domain and application. 
Microprocessor: 
A silicon chip representing a Central Processing Unit (CPU), which is capable of 
performing arithmetic as well as logical operations according to a pre-defined set of 
Instructions, which is specific to the manufacturer 
In general the CPU contains the Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU), Control Unit and 
Working registers 
Microprocessor is a dependant unit and it requires the combination of other hardware like 
Memory, Timer Unit, and Interrupt Controller etc for proper functioning. 
Intel claims the credit for developing the first Microprocessor unit Intel 4004, a 4 bit 
processor which was released in Nov 1971 
· 
Developers of microprocessors. 
Intel – Intel 4004 – November 1971(4-bit) 
Intel – Intel 4040. 
Intel – Intel 8008 – April 1972. 
Intel – Intel 8080 – April 1974(8-bit). 
Motorola – Motorola 6800. 
Intel – Intel 8085 – 1976. 
Zilog - Z80 – July 1976 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
Microcontroller: 
❖ 
A highly integrated silicon chip containing a CPU, scratch pad RAM, Special and 
General purpose Register Arrays, On Chip ROM/FLASH memory for program storage, 
❖ Timer and Interrupt control units and dedicated I/O ports 
Microcontrollers can be considered as a super set of Microprocessors 
❖ 
Microcontroller can be general purpose (like Intel 8051, designed for generic applications 
and domains) or application specific (Like Automotive AVR from Atmel Corporation. 
Designed specifically for automotive applications) 
❖ 
Since a microcontroller contains all the necessary functional blocks for independent working, 
they found greater place in the embedded domain in place of microprocessors 
❖ 
Microcontrollers are cheap, cost effective and are readily available in the market 
❖  
Texas Instruments TMS 1000 is considered as the world‟s first microcontroller 
Microprocessor Vs Microcontroller: 
Microprocesso 
Microcontrolle 
r 
A silicon chip representing a Central Processing Unit 
r 
A microcontroller is a highly integrated chip that 
(CPU), which is capable of performing arithmetic as 
well as logical operations according to a pre-defined set 
of Instructions 
It is a dependent unit. It requires the combination of 
contains a CPU, scratch pad RAM, Special and 
General purpose Register Arrays, On Chip 
ROM/FLASH memory for program storage, Timer 
and Interrupt control units and dedicated I/O ports 
It is a self contained unit and it doesn‘t require 
other chips like Timers, Program and data memory 
chips, Interrupt controllers etc for functioning 
Most of the time general purpose in design and 
external Interrupt Controller, Timer, UART etc for 
its functioning 
Mostly application oriented or domain specific 
operation 
Doesn‟t contain a built in I/O port. The I/O Port 
Most of the processors contain multiple built-in I/O 
functionality needs to be implemented with the help of 
external Programmable Peripheral Interface Chips like 
8255 
Targeted for high end market where performance is 
ports which can be operated as a single 8 or 16 or 32 
bit Port or as individual port pins 
Targeted for embedded market where performance is 
important 
Limited power saving options compared to 
not so critical (At present this demarcation is invalid) 
Includes lot of power saving features 
microcontrollers 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
General Purpose Processor (GPP) Vs Application Specific Instruction Set Processor (ASIP) 
❖ 
General Purpose Processor or GPP is a processor designed for general computational tasks 
❖ 
GPPs are produced in large volumes and targeting the general market. Due to the high 
volume production, the per unit cost for a chip is low compared to ASIC or other specific 
ICs 
❖ 
A typical general purpose processor contains an Arithmetic and Logic Unit (ALU) and Control 
Unit (CU) 
❖ 
Application Specific Instruction Set processors (ASIPs) are processors with architecture 
and instruction set optimized to specific domain/application requirements like Network 
processing, Automotive, Telecom, media applications, digital signal processing, control 
applications etc. 
❖ 
ASIPs fill the architectural spectrum between General Purpose Processors and Application 
Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) 
❖ 
The need for an ASIP arises when the traditional general purpose processor are unable to meet the 
increasing application needs 
❖ 
Some Microcontrollers (like Automotive AVR, USB AVR from Atmel), System on 
Chips, Digital Signal Processors etc are examples of Application Specific Instruction Set 
Processors (ASIPs) 
❖ 
ASIPs incorporate a processor and on-chip peripherals, demanded by the application requirement, 
program and data memory 
Digital Signal Processors (DSPs): 
Powerful special purpose 8/16/32 bit microprocessors designed specifically to meet the 
computational demands and power constraints of today's embedded audio, video, and 
communications applications 
Digital Signal Processors are 2 to 3 times faster than the general purpose microprocessors 
in signal processing applications 
 
DSPs implement algorithms in hardware which speeds up the execution whereas general 
purpose processors implement the algorithm in firmware and the speed of execution 
depends primarily on the clock for the processors 
 
DSP can be viewed as a microchip designed for performing high speed computational 
operations for „addition‟, „subtraction‟, „multiplication‟ and „division‟ 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
A typical Digital Signal Processor incorporates the following key units 
❖ 
Program Memory 
❖ Data Memory 
❖ Computational Engine 
❖ I/O Unit 
Audio video signal processing, telecommunication and multimedia applications are 
typical examples where DSP is employed 
RISC V/s CISC Processors/Controllers: 
RISC 
CISC 
Lesser no. of instructions 
Greater no. of Instructions 
Instruction Pipelining and increased execution 
Generally no instruction pipelining feature 
speed 
Orthogonal Instruction Set (Allows each instruction 
Non Orthogonal Instruction Set (All instructions 
to operate on any register and use any addressing 
are not allowed to operate on anyregister and 
mode) 
use any addressing mode. It is instruction 
specific) 
Operations are performed on registers only, the 
Operations are performed on registers or 
only memory operations are load and store 
memory depending on the instruction 
Large number of registers are available 
Limited no. of general purpose registers 
Programmer needs to write more code to execute a 
. A programmer can achieve the desired 
task since the instructions are simpler ones 
functionality with a single instruction which in 
turn provides the effect of using more simpler 
single instructions in RISC 
Single, Fixed length Instructions 
Variable length Instructions 
Less Silicon usage and pin count 
More silicon usage since more additional 
decoder logic is required to implement the 
complex instruction decoding. 
With Harvard Architecture 
Can be Harvard or Von-Neumann Architecture 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
Microprocessors/controllers based on the Harvard architecture will have separate data 
bus and instruction bus. This allows the data transfer and program fetching to occur 
simultaneously on both buses 
With Harvard architecture, the data memory can be read and written while the program 
memory is being accessed. These separated data memory and code memory buses allow 
one instruction to execute while the next instruction is fetched (―Pre-fetching‖) 
CPU 
Data Memory 
Single shared Bus 
Harvard V/s Von-Neumann Processor/Controller Architecture: 
Program 
Memory 
Harvard V/s Von-Neumann Processor/Controller Architecture 
 
The terms Harvard and Von-Neumann refers to the processor architecture design. 
 
Microprocessors/controllers based on the 
common bus for fetching both instructions 
stored in a common main memory 
Von-Neumann architecture shares a single 
and data. Program instructions and data are 
I/O 
CPU 
Memory 
Harvard Architecture 
Von-Neumann Architecture 
Separate buses for Instruction and Data fetching 
Single shared bus for Instruction and Data 
fetching 
Easier to Pipeline, so high performance can be 
Low performance Compared to Harvard 
achieved 
Architecture 
Comparatively high cost 
Cheaper 
No memoryalignment problems 
Allows self modifying codes† 
Since data memory and program memory are 
Since data memory and program memory 
stored physically in different locations, no 
are stored physically in same chip, chances 
chances for accidental corruption of program 
for accidental corruption of program 
memory 
memory 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
Big-endian V/s Little-endian processors: 
✓ 
Endianness specifies the order in which the data is stored in the memory by processor 
operations in a multi byte system (Processors whose word size is greater than one byte). 
Suppose the word length is two byte then data can be stored in memory in two different 
ways 
Higher order of data byte at the higher memory and lower order of data byte at 
location just below the higher memory 
Lower order of data byte at the higher memory and higher order of data byte at 
location just below the higher memory 
✓ 
Little-endian means the lower-order byte of the data is stored in memory at the lowest 
address, and the higher-order byte at the highest address. (The little end comes first) 
✓ 
Big-endian means the higher-order byte of the data is stored in memory at the lowest address, 
and the lower-order byte at the highest address. (The big end comes first.) 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
Load Store Operation & Instruction Pipelining: 
The RISC processor instruction set is orthogonal and it operates on registers. The memory access 
related operations are performed by the special instructions load and store. If the operand is 
specified as memory location, the content of it is loaded to a register using the load instruction. 
The instruction store stores data from a specified register to a specified memory location 
Instruction Pipelining 
The conventional instruction execution by the processor follows the fetch-decode- 
execute sequence 
The „fetch‟ part fetches the instruction from program memory or code memory and 
the decode part decodes the instruction to generate the necessary control signals 
 
The execute stage reads the operands, perform ALU operations and stores the result. 
In conventional program execution, the fetch and decode operations are performed in 
sequence 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
During the decode operation the memory address bus is available and if it possible to 
effectively utilize it for an instruction fetch, the processing speed can be increased 
 
In its simplest form instruction pipelining refers to the overlapped execution of 
instructions 
Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC): 
A microchip designed to perform a specific or unique application. It is used as 
replacement to conventional general purpose logic chips. 
ASIC integrates several functions into a single chip and thereby reduces the system 
development cost 
Most of the ASICs are proprietary products. As a single chip, ASIC consumes very small 
area in the total system and thereby helps in the design of smaller systems with high 
capabilities/functionalities. 
ASICs can be pre-fabricated for a special application or it can be custom fabricated by 
using the components from a re-usable „building block‟ library of components for a 
particular customer application 
Fabrication of ASICs requires a non-refundable initial investment (Non Recurring 
Engineering (NRE) charges) for the process technology and configuration expenses 
If the Non-Recurring Engineering Charges (NRE) is born by a third party and the 
Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) is made openly available in the market, 
the ASIC is referred as Application Specific Standard Product (ASSP) 
 
The ASSP is marketed to multiple customers just as a general-purpose product , but to a 
smaller number of customers since it is for a specific application. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
Some ASICs are proprietary products , the developers are not interested in revealing the 
internal details. 
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs): 
❖ 
Logic devices provide specific functions, including device-to-device interfacing, data 
communication, signal processing, data display, timing and control operations, and 
almost every other function a system must perform. 
❖ 
Logic devices can be classified into two broad categories - Fixed and Programmable. The 
circuits in a fixed logic device are permanent, they perform one function or set of 
functions - once manufactured, they cannot be changed 
❖ 
Programmable logic devices (PLDs) offer customers a wide range of logic capacity, 
features, speed, and voltage characteristics - and these devices can be re-configured to 
perform any number of functions at any time 
❖ 
Designers can use inexpensive software tools to quickly develop, simulate, and test their 
logic designs in PLD based design. The design can be quickly programmed into a device, 
and immediately tested in a live circuit 
❖ 
PLDs are based on re-writable memory technology and the device is reprogrammed to 
change the design 
Programmable Logic Devices (PLDs) – CPLDs and FPGA 
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and Complex Programmable Logic Devices 
(CPLDs) are the two major types of programmable logic devices 
FPGA: 
• FPGA is an IC designed to be configured bya designer after manufacturing. 
FPGAs offer the highest amount of logic density, the most features, and the highest 
performance. 
Logic gate is Medium to high density ranging from 1K to 500K system gates 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
These advanced FPGA devices also offer features such as built-in hardwired processors 
(such as the IBM Power PC), substantial amounts of memory, clock management 
systems, and support for many of the latest, very fast device-to-device signaling 
technologies 
Figure: FPGA Architecture 
These advanced FPGA devices also offer features such as built-in hardwired processors, 
substantial amounts of memory, clock management systems, and support for many of the 
latest, very fast device-to-device signaling technologies. 
FPGAs are used in a wide variety of applications ranging from data processing and 
storage, to instrumentation, telecommunications, and digital signal processing 
CPLD: 
▪ 
A complex programmable logic device (CPLD) is a programmable logic device with 
complexity between that of PALs and FPGAs, and architectural features of both. 
CPLDs, by contrast, offer much smaller amounts of logic - up to about 10,000 gates. 
CPLDs offer very predictable timing characteristics and are therefore ideal for critical 
control applications. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
CPLDs such as the Xilinx CoolRunner series also require extremely low amounts of 
power and are very inexpensive, making them ideal for cost-sensitive, battery-operated, 
portable applications such as mobile phones and digital handheld assistants. 
ADVANTAGES OF PLDs: 
• 
PLDs offer customer much more flexibility during design cycle 
• 
PLDSs do not require long lead times for prototype or production-the PLDs are already 
on a distributor‟s self and ready for shipment 
• 
PLDs do not require customers to pay for large NRE costs and purchase expensive mask 
sets 
• 
PLDs allow customers to order just the number of parts required when they need them. 
allowing them to control inventory. 
• 
PLDs are reprogrammable even after a piece of equipment is shipped to a customer. 
• 
The manufacturers able to add new features or upgrade the PLD based products that are 
in the field by uploading new programming file 
Commercial off the Shelf Component (COTS): 
 
A Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) product is one which is used „as-is‟ 
 
COTS products are designed in such a way to provide easy integration and 
interoperability with existing system components 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
Typical examples for the COTS hardware unit are Remote Controlled Toy Car control 
unit including the RF Circuitry part, High performance, high frequency microwave 
electronics (2 to 200 GHz), High bandwidth analog-to-digital converters, Devices and 
components for operation at very high temperatures, Electro-optic IR imaging arrays, 
UV/IR Detectors etc 
A COTS component in turn contains a General Purpose Processor (GPP) or Application 
Specific Instruction Set Processor (ASIP) or Application Specific Integrated Chip 
(ASIC)/Application Specific Standard Product (ASSP) or Programmable Logic Device 
(PLD) 
The major advantage of using COTS is that they are readily available in the market, 
cheap and a developer can cut down his/her development time to a great extend. 
 
There is no need to design the module yourself and write the firmware . 
 Everything will be readily supplied by the COTs manufacturer. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
The major problem faced by the end-user is that there are no operational and 
manufacturing standards. 
 
The major drawback of using COTs component in embedded design is that the 
manufacturer may withdraw the product or discontinue the production of the COTs at any 
time if rapid change in technology 
This problem adversely affect a commercial manufacturer of the embedded system which 
makes use of the specific COTs 
Memory: 
Memory is an important part of an embedded system. The memory used in embedded 
system can be either Program Storage Memory (ROM) or Data memory (RAM) 
Certain Embedded processors/controllers contain built in program memory and data 
memory and this memory is known as on-chip memory 
Certain Embedded processors/controllers do not contain sufficient memory inside the 
chip and requires external memory called off-chip memory or external memory. 
Memory – Program Storage Memory: 
❖ 
Stores the program instructions 
❖ 
Retains its contents even after the power to it is turned off. It is generally known as Non 
volatile storage memory 
❖ Depending on the fabrication, erasing and programming techniques they are classified into 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
FLASH 
Code Memory 
(ROM) 
NVRAM 
PROM 
Masked ROM 
(OTP) 
(MROM) 
EPROM 
EEPROM 
1. Masked ROM (MROM): 
One-time programmable memory. 
Uses hardwired technology for storing data. 
The device is factory programmed by masking and metallization process according to 
the data provided by the end user. 
The primary advantage of MROM is low cost for high volume production. 
MROM is the least expensive type of solid state memory. 
Different mechanisms are used for the masking process of the ROM, like 
❖ 
Creation of an enhancement or depletion mode transistor through channel implant 
❖ 
Bycreating the memory cell either using a standard transistor or a high threshold 
transistor. 
❖ 
In the high threshold mode, the supply voltage required to turn ON the transistor is 
above the normal ROM IC operating voltage. 
❖ 
This ensures that the transistor is always off and the memory cell stores always logic 
0. 
The limitation with MROM based firmware storage is the inability to modify the 
device firmware against firmware upgrades. 
 
The MROM is permanent in bit storage, it is not possible to alter the bit information 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
2. Programmable Read Only Memory (PROM) / (OTP) : 
 It is not pre-programmed by the manufacturer 
 The end user is responsible for Programming these devices. 
 
PROM/OTP has nichrome or polysilicon wires arranged in a matrix, these wires can be 
functionally viewed as fuses. 
It is programmed by a PROM programmer which selectively burns the fuses according to 
the bit pattern to be stored. 
Fuses which are not blown/burned represents a logic ―1‖ where as fuses which are 
blown/burned represents a logic ―0‖.The default state is logic ―1‖. 
OTP is widely used for commercial production of embedded systems whose proto-typed 
versions are proven and the code is finalized. 
It is a low cost solution for commercial production. 
OTPs cannot be reprogrammed. 
3. Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory (EPROM): 
Erasable Programmable Read Only (EPROM) memory gives the flexibility to re-program 
the same chip. 
During development phase , code is subject to continuous changes and using an OTP is 
not economical. 
EPROM stores the bit information by charging the floating gate of an FET 
Bit information is stored by using an EPROM Programmer, which applies high voltage to 
charge the floating gate 
EPROM contains a quartz crystal window for erasing the stored information. If the 
window is exposed to Ultra violet rays for a fixed duration, the entire memory will be 
erased 
 
Even though the EPROM chip is flexible in terms of re-programmability, it needs to be 
taken out of the circuit board and needs to be put in a UV eraser device for 20 to 30 
minutes 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
4. Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory (EEPROM): 
 
Erasable Programmable Read Only (EPROM) memory gives the flexibility to re-program 
the same chip using electrical signals 
 
The information contained in the EEPROM memory can be altered by using electrical 
signals at the register/Byte level 
Theycan be erased and reprogrammed within the circuit 
These chips include a chip erase mode and in this mode they can be erased in a few 
milliseconds 
It provides greater flexibility for system design 
The only limitation is their capacity is limited when compared with the standard ROM (A 
few kilobytes). 
5. Program Storage Memory – FLASH 
FLASH memory is a variation of EEPROM technology. 
FALSH is the latest ROM technology and is the most popular ROM technology used in 
today‟s embedded designs 
It combines the re-programmability of EEPROM and the high capacity of standard 
ROMs 
FLASH memory is organized as sectors (blocks) or pages 
FLASH memory stores information in an arrayof floating gate MOSFET transistors 
The erasing of memory can be done at sector level or page level without affecting the 
other sectors or pages 
Each sector/page should be erased before re-programming 
 
The typical erasable capacity of FLASH is of the order of a few 1000 cycles. 
Read-Write Memory/Random Access Memory (RAM) 
❖ 
RAM is the data memory or working memory of the controller/processor 
❖ 
RAM is volatile, meaning when the power is turned off, all the contents are destroyed
 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
❖ 
RAM is a direct access memory, meaning we can access the desired memory location 
directly without the need for traversing through the entire memory locations to reach the 
desired memory position (i.e. Random Access of memory location) 
Read/Write 
Memory (RAM) 
SRAM 
DRAM 
NVRAM 
1. Static RAM (SRAM): 
❖ 
Static RAM stores data in the form of Voltage. 
❖ 
They are made up of flip-flops 
❖ 
In typical implementation, an SRAM cell (bit) is realized using 
6 transistors (or 6 MOSFETs). 
❖ 
Four of the transistors are used for building the latch 
(flip-flop)part of the memory cell and 2 for controlling the 
access. 
❖ 
Static RAM is the fastest form of RAM available. 
❖ 
SRAM is fast in operation due to its resistive networking and switching capabilities 
2. Dynamic RAM (DRAM) 
❖Dynamic RAM stores data in the form of charge. They are made up of MOS transistor gates 
❖The advantages of DRAM are its high density and low cost compared to SRAM 
❖The disadvantage is that since the information is stored as charge it gets leaked off with time and to prevent this 
they need to be refreshed periodically 
❖ Special circuits called DRAM controllers are used for the refreshing operation. The refresh 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
operation is done periodically in milliseconds interval 
SRAM Vs DRAM: 
SRAM Cell 
DRAM Cell 
Made up of 6 CMOS transistors (MOSFET) 
Made up of a MOSFET and a capacitor 
Doesn‟t Require refreshing 
Requires refreshing 
Low capacity (Less dense) 
High Capacity (Highly dense) 
More expensive 
Less Expensive 
Fast in operation. Typical access time is 10ns 
Slow in operation  due to  refresh 
requirements. Typical access time is 60ns. 
Write operation is faster than read operation. 
3. Non Volatile RAM (NVRAM): 
❖ 
Random access memory with battery backup 
❖ 
It contains Static RAM based memory and a minute battery for providing supply to the 
memory in the absence of external power supply 
❖ 
The memory and battery are packed together in a single package 
❖ 
NVRAM is used for the non volatile storage of results of operations or for setting up of flags 
etc 
❖ 
The life span of NVRAM is expected to be around 10 years 
❖ 
DS1744 from Maxim/Dallas is an example for 32KB NVRAM 
Memory selection for Embedded Systems: 
• 
Selection of suitable memory is very much essential step in high performance 
applications, because the challenges and limitations of the system performance are often 
decided upon the type of memory architecture. 
• 
Systems memory requirement depend primarily on the nature of the application that is 
planned to run on the system. 
• 
Memory performance and capacity requirement for low cost systems are small, whereas 
memory throughput can be the most critical requirement in a complex, high performance 
system. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
• 
Following are the factors that are to be considered while selecting the memory devices, 
➢ 
Speed 
➢ 
Data storage size and capacity 
➢ 
Bus width 
➢ 
Power consumption 
➢ 
Cost 
Embedded system requirements: 
❖ Program memory for holding control algorithm or embedded OS and the applications 
designed to run on top of OS. 
❖ Data memory for holding variables and temporary data during task execution. 
❖  
Memory for holding non-volatile data which are modifiable bythe application. 
The memory requirement for an embedded system in terms of RAM (SRAM/DRAM) 
and ROM (EEPROM/FLASH/NVRAM) is solely dependent on the type of the embedded 
system and applications for which it is designed. 
There is no hard and fast rule for calculating the memory requirements. 
Lot of factors need to be considered for selecting the type and size of memory for 
embedded system. 
Example: Design of Embedded based electronic Toy. 
SOC or microcontroller can be selected based type(RAM &ROM) and size of on-chip 
memory for the design of embedded system. 
If on-chip memory is not sufficient then how much external memory need to be 
interfaced. 
If the ES design is RTOS based ,the RTOS requires certain amount of RAM for its 
execution and ROM for storing RTOS Image. 
 
The RTOS suppliers gives amount of run time RAM requirements and program memory 
requirements for the RTOS. 
 
Additional memory is required for executing user tasks and user applications. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
On a safer side, always add a buffer value to the total estimated RAM and ROM 
requirements. 
 
A smart phone device with windows OS is typical example for embedded device requires 
say 512MB RAM and 1GB ROM are minimum requirements for running the mobile 
device. 
And additional RAM &ROM memory is required for running user applications. 
So estimate the memory requirements for install and run the user applications without 
facing memory space. 
Memory can be selected based on size of the memory ,data bus and address bus size of 
the processor/controller. 
Memory chips are available in standard sizes like 512 bytes,1KB,2KB ,4KB,8KB,16 KB 
….1MB etc. 
FLASH memory is the popular choice for ROM in embedded applications . 
It is powerful and cost-effective solid state storage technology for mobile electronic 
devices and other consumer applications. 
Flash memory available in two major variants 
1. NAND FLASH 
2. NOR FLASH 
NAND FLASH is a high density low cost non-volatile storage memory. 
NOR FLASH is less dense and slightly expensive but supports Execute in place(XIP). 
The XIP technology allows the execution of code memory from ROM itself without the 
need for copying it to the RAM. 
The EEPROM is available as either serial interface or parallel interface chip. 
If the processor/controller of the device supports serial interface and 
the amount of data 
to write and read to and from the device (Serial EEPROM) is less. 
 
The serial EEPROM saves the address space of the total system. 
 
The memory capacity of the serial EEPROM is expressed in bits or Kilobits. 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
Industrial grade memory chips are used in certain embedded devices may be operated at 
extreme environmental conditions like high temperature. 
Sensors & Actuators: 
• 
Embedded system is in constant interaction with the real world 
• 
Controlling/monitoring functions executed by the embedded system is achieved in 
accordance with the changes happening to the Real World. 
• 
The changes in the system environment or variables are detected by the sensors 
connected to the input port of the embedded system. 
• 
If the embedded system is designed for any controlling purpose, the system will produce 
some changes in controlling variable to bring the controlled variable to the desired value. 
• 
It is achieved through an actuator connected to the out port of the embedded system. 
Sensor: 
A transducer device which converts energy from one form to another for any 
measurement or control purpose. Sensors acts as input device 
Eg. Hall Effect Sensor which measures the distance between the cushion and magnet in 
the Smart Running shoes from adidas 
Example: IR, humidity , PIR(passive infra red) , ultrasonic , piezoelectric , smoke 
sensors 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
Actuator: 
A form of transducer device (mechanical or 
electrical) 
which 
converts 
signals 
to 
corresponding physical action (motion). 
Actuator acts as an output device 
Eg. Micro motor actuator which adjusts the 
position of the cushioning element in the 
Smart Running shoes from adidas 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
The I/O Subsystem: 
❑ The I/O subsystem of the embedded system facilitates the interaction of the 
embedded system with external world 
❑ 
The interaction happens through the sensors and actuators connected to the 
Input and output ports respectively of the embedded system 
❑ 
The sensors may not be directly interfaced to the Input ports, instead 
they may be interfaced through signal conditioning and translating 
systems like ADC, Optocouplers etc 
1. I/O Devices - Light Emitting Diode (LED): 
Light Emitting Diode (LED) is an output device for visual 
Vcc 
indication in any embedded system 
R 
LED can be used as an indicator for the status of various signals 
or situations. 
Typical examples are indicating the presence of power conditions 
GND 
like „Device ON‟, „Battery low‟ or „Charging of battery‟ for a 
batteryoperated handheld embedded devices 
LED is a p-n junction diode and it contains an anode and a cathode. 
For proper functioning of the LED, the anode of it should be connected to +ve terminal 
of the supply voltage and cathode to the –ve terminal of supply voltage 
The current flowing through the LED must limited to a value below the maximum current 
that it can conduct. 
A resister is used in series between the power supply and the resistor to limit the current 
through the LED 
2. I/O Devices – 7-Segment LED Display 
The 7 – segment LED display is an output device for displaying alpha numeric characters 
 It contains 8 light-emitting diode (LED) segments arranged in a special form. Out of the 8 
LED segments, 7 are used for displaying alpha numeric characters 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
The LED segments are named A to G and the decimal point LED segment is named as 
DP 
 
The LED Segments A to G and DP should be lit accordingly to display numbers and 
characters 
 
The 7 – segment LED displays are available in two different configurations, namely; 
Common anode and Common cathode 
In the Common anode configuration, the anodes of the 8 segments are connected 
commonly whereas in the Common cathode configuration, the 8 LED segments share a 
common cathode line 
Based on the configuration of the 7 – segment LED unit, the LED segment anode or 
cathode is connected to the Port of the processor/controller in the order „A‟ segment to 
the Least significant port Pin and DP segment to the most significant Port Pin. 
The current flow through each of the LED segments should be limited to the maximum 
value supported by the LED display unit 
Anode 
Common Cathode LED Display 
DP 
GFEDCB 
A 
DPGF 
ED 
C 
B 
A 
Common Anode LED Display 
Cathode 
The typical value for the current falls within the range of 20mA 
The current through each segment can be limited by connecting a current limiting resistor 
to the anode or cathode of each segment 
3. I/O Devices – Optocoupler 
 
Optocoupler is a solid state device to isolate two parts of a circuit. 
 
Optocoupler combines an LED and a photo-transistor in a single housing (package) 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 
In electronic circuits, optocoupler is used for suppressing interference in data 
communication, circuit isolation, High voltage separation, simultaneous separation and 
intensification signal etc 
Vcc 
/p interface 
Optocouplers can be used in either input circuits or in output circuits 
4. I/O Devices – Stepper Motor: 
Stepper motor is an electro mechanical device which generates discrete 
displacement (motion) in response to dc electrical signals 
It differs from the normal dc motor in its operation. The dc motor produces 
continuous rotation on applying dc voltage whereas a stepper motor produces discrete 
rotation in response to the dc voltage applied to it 
Stepper motors are widely used in industrial embedded 
applications, consumer electronic products and robotics 
control systems 
The paper feed mechanism of a printer/fax makes use 
of stepper motors for its functioning. 
Based on the coil winding arrangements, a two phase 
stepper motor is classified into 
 
 
A 
M 
 
C 
 
 
B 
D 
GND 
✓ 
Unipolar 
▪ 
Bipolar 
GND 
LED 
AT89C51 
LED 
I/p interface 
Port Pin 
Port Pin 
Photo-transistor 
Photo-transistor 
Opto-Coupler 
IC MCT2M 
Microcontroller 
Opto-Coupler 
IC MCT2M 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
❖ 
Unipolar: A unipolar stepper motor contains two windings per phase. The direction of 
rotation (clockwise or anticlockwise) of a stepper motor is controlled by changing the 
direction of current flow. Current in one direction flows through one coil and in the 
opposite direction flows through the other coil. It is easy to shift the direction of rotation 
by just switching the terminals to which the coils are connected 
❖ 
Bipolar: A bipolar stepper motor contains single winding per phase. For reversing the 
motor rotation the current flow through the windings is reversed dynamically. It requires 
complex circuitry for current flow reversal 
5. T▪he I/O Subsystem – I/O Devices – Relay: 
An electro mechanical device which acts as dynamic path selectors for signals and power. 
▪ 
The „Relay‟ unit contains a relay coil made up of insulated wire on a metal core and a metal 
▪ 
armature with one or more contacts. 
„Relay‟ works on electromagnetic principle. 
▪ 
When a voltage is applied to the relay coil, current flows through the coil, which in turn 
generates a magnetic field. 
▪ 
The magnetic field attracts the armature core and moves the contact point. 
▪ 
The movement of the contact point changes the power/signal flow path. 
▪ 
The Relay is normally controlled using a relay driver circuit connected to the port pin of the 
processor/controller 
▪ 
A transistor can be used as the relay driver. The transistor can be selected depending on the 
relay driving current requirements. 
 
 
 
 
 
CoilR 
elay 
 
C 
oi 
l 
R 
el 
a 
y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coil 
Relay 
Single Pole Single 
Single Pole Single 
Single Pole Double 
Throw Normally 
Throw Normally 
Throw 
Open 
Closed 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
6. The I/O Subsystem – I/O Devices -Piezo Buzzer: 
• 
It is a piezoelectric device for generating audio indications in embedded applications. 
• 
A Piezo buzzer contains a piezoelectric diaphragm which produces audible sound in 
response to the voltage applied to it. 
• 
Piezoelectric buzzers are available in two types 
1. Self-driving 
2.External driving 
• 
Self-driving contains are the necessary components to 
generate sound at a predefined tone. 
• 
External driving piezo Buzzers supports the generation of different tones. 
• 
The tone can be varied by applying a variable pulse train to the piezoelectric buzzer. 
• 
A Piezo Buzzer can be directly interfaced to the port pin of the processor/Controller. 
7. The I/O Subsystem – I/O Devices – Push button switch: 
▪ 
Push Button switch is an input device. 
▪ 
Push button switch comes in two configurations, namely „Push to Make‟ 
and „Push to Break‟ 
▪ 
The switch is normally in the open state and it makes a circuit contact when 
it is pushed or pressed in the „Push to Make‟ configuration. 
▪ 
In the „Push to Break‟ configuration, the switch 
is 
normally in the closed state and it breaks the 
circuit contact when it is pushed or pressed 
▪ 
The push button stays in the „closed‟ (For Push 
to Make type) or „open‟ (For Push to Break 
type) state as long as it is kept in the pushed 
state and it breaks/makes the circuit connection 
▪ when it is released. 
Push button is used for generating a momentary pulse 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
 

MRCET ECE 
ES UNIT-2 Notes 
Text Book:- 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill 

 
 
UNIT-3 
EMBEDDED FIRMWARE DESIGN & 
DEVELOPMENT 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
Embedded Firmware 
Introduction: 
The control algorithm (Program instructions) and or the configuration 
settings that an embedded system developer dumps into the code (Program) 
memory of the embedded system 
 It is an un-avoidable part of an embedded system. 
 The embedded firmware can be developed in various methods like 
o Write the program in high level languages like Embedded C/C++ 
using an Integrated Development Environment (The IDE will contain 
an editor, compiler, linker, debugger, simulator etc. IDEs are different 
for different family of processors/controllers. 
o Write the program in Assembly Language using the Instructions 
Supported by your application‘s target processor/controller 
Embedded Firmware Design & Development: 
The  embedded  firmware  is  responsible  for  controlling  the  various 
 peripherals  of  the  embedded  hardware  and  generating  response  in 
accordance with the functional requirements of the product. 
The embedded firmware is the master brain of the embedded system. 
The embedded firmware imparts intelligence to an Embedded system. 
It is a onetime process and it can happen at any stage. 
The product starts functioning properly once the intelligence imparted to the 
product by embedding the firmware in the hardware. 
The product will continue serving the assigned task till hardware breakdown 
occurs or a corruption in embedded firmware. 
 
 In case of hardware breakdown , the damaged component may need to be 
replaced and for firmware corruptions the firmware should be re-loaded, to 
bring back the embedded product to the normal functioning. 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 
 The embedded firmware is usually stored in a permanent memory (ROM) 
and it is non alterable by end users. 
 
 Designing Embedded firmware requires understanding of the particular 
embedded product hardware, like various component interfacing, memory 
map details, I/O port details, configuration and register details of various 
hardware chips used and some programming language (either low level 
Assembly Language or High level language like C/C++ or a combination of 
the two) 
 The embedded firmware development process starts with the conversion of 
the firmware requirements into a program model using various modeling 
tools. 
 The firmware design approaches for embedded product is purely dependent 
on the complexity of the functions to be performed and speed of operation 
required. 
 There exist two basic approaches for the design and implementation of 
embedded firmware, namely; 
▪ The Super loop based approach 
▪ The Embedded Operating System based approach 
The decision on which approach needs to be adopted for firmware 
development is purely dependent on the complexity and system 
requirements 
1. Embedded firmware Design Approaches – The Super loop: 
 The Super loop based firmware development approach is Suitable for 
applications that are not time critical and where the response time is not so 
important (Embedded systems where missing deadlines are acceptable). 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 It is very similar to a conventional procedural programming where the code 
is executed task by task 
 The tasks are executed in a never ending loop. 
 The task listed on top on the program code is executed first and the tasks just 
below the top are executed after completing the first task 
 A typical super loop implementation will look like: 
1. Configure the common parameters and perform initialization for 
various hardware components memory, registers etc. 
2. Start the first task and execute it 
3. Execute the second task 
4. Execute the next task 
5. : 
6. : 
7. Execute the last defined task 
8. Jump back to the first task and follow the same flow. 
The ‗C‘ program code for the super loop is given below 
void main () 
{ 
Configurations (); 
Initializations (); 
while (1) 
{ 
Task 1 (); 
Task 2 (); 
: 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
: 
Task n (); 
} 
} 
Pros: 
 
Cons: 
Doesn‘t require an Operating System for task scheduling and monitoring and 
free from OS related overheads 
Simple and straight forward design 
Reduced memory footprint 
 
Non Real time in execution behavior (As the number of tasks increases the 
frequency at which a task gets CPU time for execution also increases) 
Any issues in any task execution may affect the functioning of the product 
(This can be effectively tackled by using Watch Dog Timers for task 
execution monitoring) 
Enhancements: 
▪ Combine Super loop based technique with interrupts 
▪ Execute the tasks (like keyboard handling) which require Real time attention 
as Interrupt Service routines. 
2. Embedded firmware Design Approaches – Embedded OS based Approach: 
 
 The embedded device contains an Embedded Operating System which can 
be one of: 
▪ A Real Time Operating System (RTOS) 
▪ A Customized General Purpose Operating System (GPOS) 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 The Embedded OS is responsible for scheduling the execution of user tasks 
and the allocation of system resources among multiple tasks 
 It Involves lot of OS related overheads apart from managing and executing 
user defined tasks 
 Microsoft® Windows XP Embedded is an example of GPOS for embedded 
devices 
 Point of Sale (PoS) terminals, Gaming Stations, Tablet PCs etc are examples 
of embedded devices running on embedded GPOSs 
 ‗Windows 
CE‘, 
‗Windows 
Mobile‘,‗QNX‘, 
‗VxWorks‘, 
‗ThreadX‘, 
‗MicroC/OS-II‘, ‗Embedded Linux‘, ‗Symbian‘ etc are examples of RTOSs 
employed in Embedded Product development 
 Mobile Phones, PDAs, Flight Control Systems etc are examples 
of 
embedded devices that runs on RTOSs 
Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options 
 Assembly Language 
 High Level Language 
o Subset of C (Embedded C) 
o Subset of C++ (Embedded C++) 
o Any other high level language with supported Cross-compiler 
Mix of Assembly & High level Language 
o Mixing High Level Language (Like C) with Assembly Code 
o Mixing Assembly code with High Level Language (Like C) 
o Inline Assembly 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
1. Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options – Assembly 
Language 
 ‗Assembly Language‘ is the human readable notation of ‗machine 
language‘ 
‗Machine language‘ is a processor understandable language 
Machine language is a binary representation and it consists of 1s and 0s 
Assembly language and machine languages 
are processor/controller 
dependent 
 An Assembly language program written for one processor/controller family 
will not work with others 
 Assembly language programming is the process of writing processor specific 
machine code in mnemonic fo rm, converting the mnemonics into actual 
processor instructions (machine language) and associated data using an 
assembler 
 The general format of an assembly language instruction is an Opcode 
followed by Operands 
 The Opcode tells the processor/controller what to do and the Operands 
provide the data and information required to perform the action specified by 
the opcode 
It is not necessary that all opcode should have Operands following them. 
Some of the Opcode implicitly contains the operand and in such situation no 
operand is required. The operand may be a single operand, dual operand or 
more 
The 8051 Assembly Instruction 
MOV A, #30 
Moves decimal value 30 to the 8051 Accumulator register. Here MOV A is the 
Opcode and 30 is the operand (single operand). The same instruction when written 
in machine language will look like 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
01110100 00011110 
The first 8 bit binary value 01110100 represents the opcode MOV A and the second 
8 bit binary value 00011110 represents the operand 30. 
 Assembly language instructions are written one per line 
 A machine code program consists of a sequence of assembly language 
instructions, where each statement contains a mnemonic (Opcode + 
Operand) 
 Each line of an assembly language program is split into four fields as: 
LABEL 
OPCODE OPERAND COMMENTS 
 LABEL is an optional field. A ‗LABEL‘ is an identifier used extensively in 
programs to reduce the reliance on programmers for remembering where 
data or code is located. LABEL is commonly used for representing 
❖ A memory location, address of a program, sub-routine, code portion etc. 
❖ The maximum length of a label differs between assemblers. 
Assemblers insist strict formats for labeling. Labels are always 
suffixed by a colon and begin with a valid character. Labels can 
contain number from 0 to 9 and special character _ (underscore). 
;############################################################### 
; SUBROUTINE FOR GENERATING DELAY 
; DELAY PARAMETR PASSED THROUGH REGISTER R1 
; RETURN VALUE NONE,REGISTERS USED: R0, R1 
;############################################################### 
##### 
DELAY: 
MOV R0, #255 
; Load Register R0 with 255 
DJNZ R1, DELAY; Decrement R1 and loop till R1= 0 
RET 
 
; Return to calling program 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
▪ 
The symbol ; represents the start of a comment. Assembler ignores the 
text in a line after the ; symbol while assembling the program 
▪ 
DELAY is a label for representing the start address of the memory 
location where the piece of code is located in code memory 
▪ 
The above piece of code can be executed by giving the label DELAY as 
part of the instruction. E.g. LCALL DELAY; LMP DELAY 
2. Assembly Language – Source File to Hex File Translation: 
The Assembly language program written in assembly code is saved as 
.asm (Assembly file) file or a .src (source) file or a format supported by 
the assembler 
Similar to ‗C‘ and other high level language programming, it is possible 
to have multiple source files called modules in assembly language 
programming. Each module is represented by a ‗.asm‘ or ‗.src‘ file or the 
assembler supported file format similar to the ‗.c‘ files in C programming 
The software utility called ‗Assembler‘ performs the translation of 
assembly code to machine code 
The assemblers for different family of target machines are different. A51 
Macro Assembler from Keil software is a popular assembler for the 8051 
family micro controller 
Figure 5: Assembly Language to machine language conversion process 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 
 Each source file can be assembled separately to examine the syntax errors 
and incorrect assembly instructions 
 
 Assembling of each source file generates a corresponding object file. The 
object file does not contain the absolute address of where the generated 
code needs to be placed (a re-locatable code) on the program memory 
The software program called linker/locater is responsible for assigning 
absolute address to object files during the linking process 
The Absolute object file created from the object files corresponding to 
different source code modules contain information about the address 
where each instruction needs to be placed in code memory 
A software utility called ‗Obje ct to Hex file converter‘ translates the 
absolute object file to corresponding hex file (binary file) 
Advantages: 
 1.Efficient Code Memory & Data Memory Usage (Memory Optimization): 
➢ The developer is well aware of the target processor architecture and 
mem ory organization, so optimized code can be written for 
performing operations. 
➢ This leads to less utilization of code memory and efficient utilization 
of data memory. 
 2.High Performance: 
➢ Optimized code not only improves the code memory usage but also 
improves the total system performance. 
➢ Through effective assembly coding, optimum performance can be 
achieved for target processor. 
 3.Low level Hardware Access: 
➢ Most of the code for low level programming like accessing external 
device specific registers from OS kernel ,device drivers, and low level 
interrupt routines, etc are making use of direct assembly coding. 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 4.Code Reverse Engineering: 
➢ It is the process of understanding the technology behind a product by 
extracting the information from the finished product. 
➢ It can easily be converted into assembly code using a dis-assembler 
program for the target machine. 
Drawbacks: 
 1.High Development time: 
➢ The developer takes lot of time to study about architecture ,memory 
organization, addressing modes and instruction set of target 
processor/controller. 
➢ More lines of assembly code is required for performing a simple 
action. 
 2.Developer dependency: 
➢ There is no common written rule for developing assembly language 
based applications. 
 3.Non portable: 
➢ Target applications written in assembly instructions are valid only for 
that particular family of processors and cannot be re-used for another 
target processors/controllers. 
➢ If the target processor/controller changes, a complete re-writing of the 
application 
using 
assembly 
language 
for 
new 
target 
processor/controller is required. 
2. Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options – High Level 
Language 
 The embedded firmware is written in any high level language like C, C++ 
 A software utility called ‗cross-compiler‘ converts the high level language to 
target processor specific machine code 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
▪ 
The cross-compilation of each module generates a corresponding object 
file. The object file does not contain the absolute address of where the 
generated code needs to be placed (a re-locatable code) on the program 
memory 
▪ 
The software program called linker/locater is responsible for assigning 
absolute address to object files during the linking process 
▪ 
The Absolute object file created from the object files corresponding to 
different source code modules contain information about the address where 
each instruction needs to be placed in code memory 
▪ 
A software utility called ‗Object to Hex file converter‘ translates the 
absolute object file to corresponding hex file (binary file) 
Embedded 
firmware Development 
Languages/Options 
– High Level 
Language – Source File to Hex File Translation 
Machine Code 
(Hex File) 
Figure 6: High level language to machine language conversion process 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
Advantages: 
Reduced Development time: Developer requires less or little 
Drawbacks: 
knowledge on internal hardware details and architecture of the target 
processor/Controller. 
Developer independency: The syntax used by most of the high level 
languages are universal and a program written high level can easily 
understand by a second person knowing the syntax of the language 
Portability: An Application written in high level language for 
particular target processor /controller can be easily be converted to 
another target processor/controller specific application with little or 
less effort 
• The cross compilers may not be efficient in generating the optimized 
target processor specific instructions. 
• Target images created by such compilers may be messy and non- 
optimized in terms of performance as well as code size. 
• The investment required for high level language based development 
tools (IDE) is high compared to Assembly Language based firmware 
development tools. 
Embedded firmware Development Languages/Options – Mixing of Assembly 
Language with High Level Language 
Embedded firmware development may require the mixing of Assembly 
Language with high level language or vice versa. 
 
 Interrupt handling, 
Source code is already available in high level 
language\Assembly Language etc are examples 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 
 High Level language and low level language can be mixed in three different 
ways 
✓ Mixing Assembly Language with High level language like ‗C‘ 
✓ Mixing High level language like ‗C‘ with Assembly Language 
✓ In line Assembly 
 The passing of parameters and return values between the high level and low 
level language is cross-compiler specific 
1. Mixing 
Assembly Language  with 
High 
level 
language 
like 
‘C’ 
(Assembly Language with ‘C’):    
 Assembly routines are mixed with ‗C‘ in situations where the entire program 
is written in ‗C‘ and the cross compiler in use do not have built in support 
for implementing certain features like ISR. 
 If the programmer wants to take advantage of the speed and optimized code 
offered by the machine code generated by hand written assembly rather than 
cross compiler generated machine code. 
 For accessing certain low level hardware ,the timing specifications may be 
very critical and cross compiler generated machine code may not be able to 
offer the required time specifications accurately. 
Writing the hardware/peripheral access routine in processor/controller 
specific assembly language and invoking it from ‗C‘ is the most advised 
method. 
Mixing ‗C‘ and assembly is little complicated. 
 
 The programmer must be aware of how to pass parameters from the ‗C‘ 
routine to assembly and values returned from assembly routine to ‗C‘ and 
how Assembly routine is invoked from the ‗C‘ code. 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
 
 Passing parameter to the assembly routine and returning values from the 
assembly routine to the caller ‗C‘ function and the method of invoking the 
assembly routine from ‗C‘ code is cross compiler dependent. 
 There is no universal written rule for purpose. 
 We can get this information from documentation of the cross compiler. 
 Different cross compilers implement these features in different ways 
depending on GPRs and memory supported by target processor/controller 
2. Mixing 
High 
level 
language 
like ‘C’ with 
Assembly 
Language 
(‘C’ with Assembly Language) 
 The source code is already available in assembly language and routine 
written in a high level language needs to be included to the existing code. 
 The entire source code is planned in Assembly code for various reasons like 
optimized code, optimal performance, efficient code memory utilization and 
proven expertise in handling the assembly. 
 The functions written in ‗C‘ use parameter passing to the function and 
returns values to the calling functions. 
The programmer must be aware of how parameters are passed to the 
function and how values returned from the function and how function is 
invoked from the assembly language environment. 
Passing parameter to the function and returning values from the function 
using CPU registers , stack memory and fixed memory. 
Its implementation is cross compiler dependent and varies across compilers. 

Embedded Systems 
Unit-3Notes 
4 
3. In line Assembly: 
• Inline 
assembly 
is 
another 
technique 
for 
inserting 
the 
target 
processor/controller specific assembly instructions at any location of source 
code written in high level language ‗C‘ 
• Inline Assembly avoids the delay in calling an assembly routine from a ‗C‘ 
code. 
• Special keywords are used to indicate the start and end of Assembly 
instructions 
• E.g 
#pragma asm 
Mov A,#13H 
#pragma ensasm 
• Keil C51 uses the keywords #pragma asm and #pragma endasm to indicate 
a block of code written in assembly. 
Text Books: 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill 
2. Embedded System Design-Raj Kamal TMH 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN 
UNIT-IV 
RTOS Based Embedded System Design 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
OS 
manages 
resources 
and 
available 
to 
the 
system 
makes  them 
the 
user 
applications/tasks on a need basis 
The primary functions of an Operating system is 
Make the system convenient to use 
Organize and manage the system resources efficiently andcorrectly 
Interface 
Operating System Basics: 
• The Operating System acts as a bridge between the user applications/tasks 
and the underlying system resources through a set of system functionalities 
and services 
• 
• 
Figure 1: The Architecture of Operating System 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
The Kernel: 
• The kernel is the core of the operating system 
• It is responsible for managing the system resources and the communication 
among the hardware and other system services 
• Kernel acts as the abstraction layer between system resources and user 
applications 
• Kernel contains a set of system libraries and services. 
• For a general purpose OS, the kernel contains different services like 
➢ Process Management 
➢ Primary Memory Management 
➢ File System management 
➢ I/O System (Device) Management 
➢ Secondary Storage Management 
➢ Protection 
➢ Time management 
➢ Interrupt Handling 
Kernel Space and User Space: 
• The program code corresponding to the kernel applications/services are kept 
in a contiguous area (OS dependent) of primary (working) memory and is 
protected from the un-authorized access by user programs/applications 
• The memory space at which the kernel code is located is known as ‗Kernel 
Space’ 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• All user applications are loaded to a specific area of primary memory and 
this memory area is referred as ‗User Space‘ 
• The partitioning of memory into kernel and user space is purely Operating 
System dependent 
• An operating system with virtual memory support, loads the user 
applications into its corresponding virtual memory space with demand 
paging technique 
• Most of the operating systems keep the kernel application code in main 
memory and it is not swapped out into the secondary memory 
Monolithic Kernel: 
• All kernel services run in the kernel space 
• All kernel modules run within the same memory space under a single kernel 
thread 
• The tight internal integration of kernel modules in monolithic kernel 
architecture allows the effective 
utilization of the low-level features of 
the underlying system 
• The major drawback of monolithic 
kernel is that any error or failure in 
any one of the kernel modules leads to 
the crashing of the entire kernel 
application 
• LINUX, SOLARIS, MS-DOS kernels 
are examples of monolithic kernel 
Applications 
 
 
 
 
 
Monolithic kernel with all 
operating system services 
running in kernel space 
Figure 2: The Monolithic Kernel Model 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Microkernel 
• The microkernel design incorporates only the essential set of Operating 
System services into the kernel 
• Rest of the Operating System services are implemented in programs known 
as ‗Servers‘ which runs in user space 
• The kernel design is highly 
modular provides OS-neutral 
abstraction. 
• Memory management, process 
Servers (kernel 
services running 
in user space) 
 
 
Applications 
management, timer systems and 
interrupt handlers are examples of 
essential services, which forms the part 
of the microkernel 
Microkernel with essential 
services like memory 
management, process 
management, timer systemetc... 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The Microkernel Model 
• QNX, Minix 3 kernels are examples for microkernel. 
Benefits of Microkernel: 
1. Robustness: If a problem is encountered in any services in server can 
reconfigured and re-started without the need for re-starting the entire OS. 
2. Configurability: Any services , which run as ‗server‘ application can be 
changed without need to restart the whole system. 
Types of Operating Systems: 
Depending on the type of kernel and kernel services, purpose and type of 
computing systems where the OS is deployed and the responsiveness to 
applications, Operating Systems are classified into 
1. General Purpose Operating System (GPOS): 
2. Real Time Purpose Operating System (RTOS): 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
1. General Purpose Operating System (GPOS): 
• Operating Systems, which are deployed in general computing systems 
• The kernel is more generalized and contains all the required services to 
execute generic applications 
• Need not be deterministic in execution behavior 
• May inject random delays into application software and thus cause slow 
responsiveness of an application at unexpected times 
• Usually deployed in computing systems where deterministic behavior is not 
an important criterion 
• Personal Computer/Desktop system is a typical example for a systemwhere 
GPOSs are deployed. 
• Windows XP/MS-DOS etc are examples of General Purpose Operating 
System 
2. Real Time Purpose Operating System (RTOS): 
• Operating Systems, which are deployed in embedded systems demanding 
real-time response 
• Deterministic in execution behavior. Consumes only known amount oftime 
for kernel applications 
• Implements scheduling policies for executing the highest priority 
task/application always 
• Implements policies and rules concerning time-critical allocation of a 
system‘s resources 
• Windows CE, QNX, VxWorks , MicroC/OS-II etc are examples of Real 
Time Operating Systems (RTOS) 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
The Real Time Kernel: The kernel of a Real Time Operating System is referred 
as Real Time kernel. In complement to the conventional OS kernel, the Real Time 
kernel is highly specialized and it contains only the minimal set of services 
required for running the user applications/tasks. The basic functions of a Real Time 
kernel are 
a) Task/Process management 
b) Task/Process scheduling 
c) Task/Process synchronization 
d) Error/Exception handling 
e) Memory Management 
f) Interrupt handling 
g) Time management 
• Real Time Kernel Task/Process Management: Deals with setting up the 
memory space for the tasks, loading the task‘s code into the memory space, 
allocating system resources, setting up a Task Control Block (TCB) for the task 
and task/process termination/deletion. A Task Control Block (TCB) is used for 
holding the information corresponding to a task. TCB usually contains the 
following set of information 
❖ Task ID: Task Identification Number 
❖ Task State: The current state of the task. (E.g. State= ‗Ready‘ for a task 
which is ready to execute) 
❖ Task Type: Task type. Indicates what is the type for this task. The task can 
be a hard real time or soft real time or background task. 
❖ Task Priority: Task priority (E.g. Task priority =1 for task with priority = 1) 
❖ Task Context Pointer: Context pointer. Pointer for context saving 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
❖ Task Memory Pointers: Pointers to the code memory, data memory and 
stack memory for the task 
❖ Task System Resource Pointers: Pointers to system resources (semaphores, 
mutex etc) used by the task 
❖ Task Pointers: Pointers to other TCBs (TCBs for preceding, next and 
waiting tasks) 
❖ Other Parameters Other relevant task parameters 
The parameters and implementation of the TCB is kernel dependent. The TCB 
parameters vary across different kernels, based on the task management 
implementation 
• Task/Process Scheduling: Deals with sharing the CPU among various 
tasks/processes. A kernel application called ‗Scheduler‘ handles the task 
scheduling. Scheduler is nothing but an algorithm implementation, which 
performs the efficient and optimal scheduling of tasks to provide a deterministic 
behavior. 
 Task/Process Synchronization: Deals with synchronizing the concurrent 
access of a resource, which is shared across multiple tasks and the 
communication between various tasks. 
 Error/Exception handling: Deals with registering and handling the errors 
occurred/exceptions raised during the execution of tasks. Insufficient memory, 
timeouts, deadlocks, deadline missing, bus error, divide by zero, unknown 
instruction execution etc, are examples of errors/exceptions. Errors/Exceptions 
can happen at the kernel level services or at task level. Deadlock is an example 
for kernel level exception, whereas timeout is an example for a task level 
exception. The OS kernel gives the information about the error in the form of a 
system call (API). 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
 Memory Management: 
❖ The memory management function of an RTOS kernel is slightly 
different compared to the General Purpose Operating Systems 
❖ The memory allocation time increases depending on the size of the block 
of memory needs to be allocated and the state of the allocated memory 
block (initialized memory block consumes more allocation time than un- 
initialized memory block) 
❖ Since predictable timing and deterministic behavior are the primary focus 
for an RTOS, RTOS achieves this by compromising the effectiveness of 
memory allocation 
❖ RTOS generally uses ‗block‘ based memory allocation technique, instead 
of the usual dynamic memory allocation techniques used by the GPOS. 
❖ RTOS kernel uses blocks of fixed size of dynamic memory and the block 
is allocated for a task on a need basis. The blocks are stored in a ‗Free 
buffer Queue‘. 
❖ Most of the RTOS kernels allow tasks to access any of the memory 
blocks without any memory protection to achieve predictable timing and 
avoid the timing overheads 
❖ RTOS kernels assume that the whole design is proven correct and 
protection is unnecessary. Some commercial RTOS kernels allow 
memory protection as optional and the kernel enters a fail-safe mode 
when an illegal memory access occurs 
❖ The memory management function of an RTOS kernel is slightly 
different compared to the General Purpose Operating Systems 
❖ A few RTOS kernels implement Virtual Memory concept for memory 
allocation if the system supports secondary memory storage (like HDD 
and FLASH memory). 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
❖ In the ‗block‘ based memory allocation, a block of fixed memory is 
always allocated for tasks on need basis and it is taken as a unit. Hence, 
there will not be any memory fragmentation issues. 
❖ The memory allocation can be implemented as constant functions and 
thereby it consumes fixed amount of time for memory allocation. This 
leaves the deterministic behavior of the RTOS kernel untouched. 
 Interrupt Handling: 
❖ Interrupts inform the processor that an external device or an associated 
task requires immediate attention of the CPU. 
❖ Interrupts can be either Synchronous or Asynchronous. 
❖ Interrupts which occurs in sync with the currently executing task is known 
as Synchronous interrupts. Usually the software interrupts fall under the 
Synchronous Interrupt category. Divide by zero, memory segmentation 
error etc are examples of Synchronous interrupts. 
❖ For synchronous interrupts, the interrupt handler runs in the same context 
of the interrupting task. 
❖ Asynchronous interrupts are interrupts, which occurs at any point of 
execution of any task, and are not in sync with the currently executing 
task. 
❖ The interrupts generated by external devices (by asserting the Interrupt 
line of the processor/controller to which the interrupt line of the device is 
connected) connected to the processor/controller, timer overflow 
interrupts, serial data reception/ transmission interrupts etc are examples 
for asynchronous interrupts. 
❖ For asynchronous interrupts, the interrupt handler is usually written as 
separate task (Depends on OS Kernel implementation) and it runs in a 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
different context. Hence, a context switch happens while handling the 
asynchronous interrupts. 
❖ Priority levels can be assigned to the interrupts and each interrupts can be 
enabled or disabled individually. 
❖ Most of the RTOS kernel implements ‗Nested Interrupts‘ architecture. 
Interrupt nesting allows the pre-emption (interruption) of an Interrupt 
Service Routine (ISR), servicing an interrupt, by a higher priority 
interrupt. 
 Time Management: 
❖ Interrupts inform the processor that an external device or an associated 
task requires immediate attention of the CPU. 
❖ Accurate time management is essential for providing precise time 
reference for all applications 
❖ The time reference to kernel is provided by a high-resolution Real Time 
Clock (RTC) hardware chip (hardware timer) 
❖ The hardware timer is programmed to interrupt the processor/controller 
at a fixed rate. This timer interrupt is referred as ‗Timer tick‘ 
❖ The ‗Timer tick‘ is taken as the timing reference by the kernel. The 
‗Timer tick‘ interval may vary depending on the hardware timer. Usually 
the ‗Timer tick‘ varies in the microseconds range 
❖ The time parameters for tasks are expressed as the multiples of the 
‗Timer tick‘ 
❖ The System time is updated based on the ‗Timer tick‘ 
❖ If the System time register is 32 bits wide and the ‗Timer tick‘ interval is 
1microsecond, the System time register will reset in 
232 * 10-6/ (24 * 60 * 60) = 49700 Days =~ 0.0497 Days = 1.19 Hours 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
If the ‗Timer tick‘ interval is 1 millisecond, the System time register will 
reset in 
232 * 10-3 / (24 * 60 * 60) = 497 Days = 49.7 Days =~ 50 Days 
The ‗Timer tick‘ interrupt is handled by the ‗Timer Interrupt‘ handler of kernel. 
The ‗Timer tick‘ interrupt can be utilized for implementing the following 
actions. 
• Save the current context (Context of the currently executing task) 
• Increment the System time register by one. Generate timing error and reset 
the System time register if the timer tick count is greater than the maximum 
range available for System time register 
• Update the timers implemented in kernel (Increment or decrement the timer 
registers for each timer depending on the count direction setting for each 
register. Increment registers with count direction setting = ‗count up‘ and 
decrement registers with count direction setting = ‗count down‘) 
• Activate the periodic tasks, which are in the idle state 
• Invoke the scheduler and schedule the tasks again based on the scheduling 
algorithm 
• Delete all the terminated tasks and their associated data structures (TCBs) 
• Load the context for the first task in the ready queue. Due to the re- 
scheduling, the ready task might be changed to a new one from the task, 
which was pre-empted by the ‗Timer Interrupt‘ task 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
 Hard Real-time System: 
❖ A Real Time Operating Systems which strictly adheres to the timing 
constraints for a task 
❖ A Hard Real Time system must meet the deadlines for a task without any 
slippage 
❖ Missing any deadline may produce catastrophic results for Hard Real 
Time Systems, including permanent data lose and irrecoverable damages 
to the system/users 
❖ Emphasize on the principle ‗A late answer is a wrong answer‘ 
❖ Air bag control systems and Anti-lock Brake Systems (ABS) of vehicles 
are typical examples of Hard Real Time Systems 
❖ As a rule of thumb, Hard Real Time Systems does not implement the 
virtual memory model for handling the memory. This eliminates the 
delay in swapping in and out the code corresponding to the task to and 
from the primary memory 
❖ The presence of Human in the loop (HITL) for tasks introduces un- 
expected delays in the task execution. Most of the Hard Real Time 
Systems are automatic and does not contain a ‗human in the loop‘ 
• Soft Real-time System: 
❖ Real Time Operating Systems that does not guarantee meeting deadlines, 
but, offer the best effort to meet the deadline 
❖ Missing deadlines for tasks are acceptable if the frequency of deadline 
missing is within the compliance limit of the Quality of Service(QoS) 
❖ A Soft Real Time system emphasizes on the principle ‗A late answer is an 
acceptable answer, but it could have done bit faster’ 
❖ Soft Real Time systems most often have a ‗human in the loop (HITL)‘ 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
❖ Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) is a typical example of Soft Real Time 
System. If the ATM takes a few seconds more than the ideal operation 
time, nothing fatal happens. 
❖ An audio video play back system is another example of Soft Real Time 
system. No potential damage arises if a sample comes late by fraction of a 
second, for play back. 
 Tasks, Processes & Threads : 
▪ In the Operating System context, a task is defined as the program in 
execution and the related information maintained by the Operating 
system for the program 
▪ Task is also known as ‗Job‘ in the operating systemcontext 
▪ A program or part of it in execution is also called a ‗Process‘ 
▪ The terms ‗Task‘, ‗job‘ and ‗Process‘ refer to the same entity in the 
Operating System context and most often they are usedinterchangeably 
▪ A process requires various system resources like CPU for executing the 
process, memory for storing the code corresponding to the process and 
associated variables, I/O devices for information exchange etc 
 The structure of a Processes 
▪ The concept of ‗Process‘ leads to concurrent execution (pseudo parallelism) 
of tasks and thereby the efficient utilization of the CPU and other system 
resources 
▪ Concurrent execution is achieved through the sharing of CPU among the 
processes. 
▪ A process mimics a processor in properties and holds a set of registers, 
process status, a Program Counter (PC) to point to the next executable 
instruction of the process, a stack for holding the local variables associated 
with the process and the code corresponding to the process 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Code Memory 
corresponding to the 
Process 
Process 
▪ A process, which inherits all 
the properties of the CPU, 
can be considered as a 
virtual processor, awaiting 
its turn to have its properties 
switched into the physical 
processor 
Figure: 4 Structure of a Process 
• When the process gets its turn, its registers and Program counter register 
becomes mapped to the physical registers of the CPU 
Memory organization of Processes: 
▪ The memory occupied by the process is 
segregated into three regions namely; Stack 
memory, Data memory and Code memory 
▪ The ‗Stack‘ memory holds all temporary 
data such as variables local to the process 
▪ Data memory holds all global data for the 
process 
▪ The code memory contains the program 
code (instructions) corresponding to the 
process 
Fig: 5 Memory organization of a Process 
Stack Memory 
Stack memory
downwards 
grows 
Data memory grows 
upwards 
Data Memory 
Code Memory 
Stack (Stack 
Pointer) 
Working Registers 
Status Registers 
Program Counter (PC) 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
▪ On loading a process into the main memory, a specific area of memory is 
allocated for the process 
▪ The stack memory usually starts at the highest memory address from the 
memory area allocated for the process (Depending on the OS kernel 
implementation) 
 Process States & State Transition 
▪ The creation of a process to its termination is not a single step operation 
▪ The process traverses through a series of states during its transition from the 
newly created state to the terminated state 
▪ The cycle through which a process changes its state from ‗newly created‘ to 
‗execution completed‘ is known as ‗Process Life Cycle‘. The various states 
through which a process traverses through during a Process Life Cycle 
indicates the current status of the process with respect to time and also 
provides information on what it is allowed to do next 
 Process State s & State Transition: 
• Created State: The state at which a process is being created is referred as 
‗Created State‘. The Operating System recognizes a process in the ‗Created 
State‘ but no resources are allocated to the process 
• Ready State: The state, where a process is incepted into the memory and 
awaiting the processor time for execution, is known as ‗Ready State‘. At 
this stage, the process is placed in the ‗Ready list‘ queue maintained by the 
OS 
• Running State: The state where in the source code instructions 
corresponding to the process is being executed is called ‗Running State‘. 
Running state is the state at which the process execution happens 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
▪ . Blocked State/Wait State: Refers 
to a state where a running process is 
temporarily 
suspended 
from 
execution 
and 
does 
not 
have 
immediate access to resources. The 
blocked state might have invoked by 
various conditions like- the process 
enters a wait state for an event to 
occur (E.g. Waiting for user inputs 
such as keyboard input) or waiting 
for getting access to a shared 
resource like semaphore, mutex etc   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Blocked 
Created 
 
 
Incepted into memory 
 
 
Ready 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Running 
 
 
Execution Completion 
 
 
Completed 
Figure 6.Process states and State transition 
▪ Completed State: A state where the process completes its execution 
 
The transition of a process from one state to another is known as 
‗Statetransition‘ 
 
When a process changes its state from Ready to running or from 
running toblocked or terminated or from blocked to running, the CPU 
allocation for the process may alsochange 
 Threads 
• A thread is the primitive that can execute code 
• A thread is a single sequential flow of control within a process 
• ‗Thread‘ is also known as lightweight process 
• A process can have many threads of execution 
Scheduled for 
Execution 
 Interrupted or 
 
Preempted 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
{ 
i 
( 
{ 
/ 
 
 
} 
} 
• Different threads, which are part of a 
process, share the same address space; 
meaning they share the data memory, 
code memory and heap memory area 
• Threads maintain their own thread status 
(CPU register values), Program Counter 
(PC) and stack 
Figure 7 Memory organization of process and its associated Threads 
 The Concept of multithreading 
Use of multiple threads to execute a process brings the following advantage. 
• Better 
memory 
utilization. 
Multiple threads of the same 
process share the address space 
for data memory. This also 
reduces the complexity of inter 
thread 
communication 
since 
variables can be shared across the 
threads. 
• Since the process is split into 
different threads, when one 
thread enters a wait state, the 
CPU can be utilized by other 
 
 
Task/Process 
 
Code Memory 
Data Memory 
Registers 
Registers 
Registers 
hread 1 
oid main (void) 
/Create child 
hread 1 
reateThread(NULL, 
000,(LPTHREAD_STA 
T_ROUTINE) 
hildThread1,NULL, 
, &dwThreadID); 
/Create child 
hread 2 
reateThread(NULL, 
000,(LPTHREAD_STA 
T_ROUTINE) 
hildThread2,NULL, 
, &dwThreadID); 
hread 2 
nt ChildThread1 
void) 
/Do something 
hread 3 
nt ChildThread2 
void) 
/Do something 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 Process with multi-threads 
• threads of the process that do not require the event, which the other thread is 
waiting, for processing. This speeds up the execution of the process. 
• Efficient CPU utilization. The CPU is engaged all time. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
 Thread V/s Process 
Thread 
Process 
Thread is a single unit of execution and is part 
of process. 
Process is a program in execution and contains 
one or more threads. 
A thread does not have its own data memory 
and heap memory. It shares the data memory 
and heap memory with other threads of the 
same process. 
Process has its own code memory, data memory 
and stack memory. 
A thread cannot live independently; it lives 
within the process. 
A process contains at least one thread. 
There can be multiple threads in a process. 
The first thread (main thread) calls the main 
function and occupies the start of the stack 
memory of the process. 
Threads within a process share the code, data 
and heap memory. Each thread holds separate 
memory area for stack (shares the total stack 
memory of the process). 
Threads are very inexpensive to create 
Processes are very expensive to create. Involves 
many OS overhead. 
Context switching is inexpensive and fast 
Context switching is complex and involves lot of 
OS overhead and is comparatively slower. 
If a thread expires, its stack is reclaimed by the 
process. 
If a process dies, the resources allocated to it are 
reclaimed by the OS and all the associated 
threads of the process also dies. 
Advantages of Threads: 
1. Better memory utilization: Multiple threads of the same process share the 
address space for data memory. This also reduces the complexity of inter 
thread communication since variables can be shared across the threads. 
2. Efficient CPU utilization: The CPU is engaged all time. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
3. Speeds up the execution of the process: The process is split into different 
threads, when one thread enters a wait state, the CPU can be utilized by 
other threads of the process that do not require the event, which the other 
thread is waiting, for processing. 
Multiprocessing & Multitasking 
• The ability to execute multiple processes simultaneously is referred as 
multiprocessing 
• Systems which are capable of performing multiprocessing are known as 
multiprocessor systems 
• Multiprocessor systems possess multiple CPUs and can execute multiple 
processes simultaneously 
• The ability of the Operating System to have multiple programs in memory, 
which are ready for execution, is referred as multiprogramming 
• Multitasking refers to the ability of an operating system to hold multiple 
processes i n memory and switch the processor (CPU) from executing one 
process to another process 
• Multitasking involves ‗Context switching‘, ‗Context saving‘ and ‗Context 
retrieval‘ 
• Context switching refers to the switching of execution context from task to 
other 
• When a task/process switching happens, the current context of execution 
should be saved to (Context saving) retrieve it at a later point of time when 
the CPU executes the process, which is interrupted currently due to 
execution switching 
• During context switching, the context of the task to be executed is retrieved 
from the saved context list. This is known as Context retrieval 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Multitasking – Context Switching: 
Process 2 
Process 1 
▪ 
Types of Multitasking : 
Depending on how the task/process execution switching act is implemented, 
multitasking can is classified into 
Idle 
due to ‗Context 
Switching‘ 
due to ‗Context 
Switching‘ 
Figure 9 Context Switching 
Multiprogramming: The ability of the Operating System to have multiple 
programs in memory, which are ready for execution, is referred as 
multiprogramming. 
Running 
Idle 
Waits in ‘Ready’ Queue 
Running 
dy’ Queue 
Waits in ‘Re 
Running 
Idle 
Processes 
Execution switches to Process 2 
(Interrupt or System Call) 
Save Current context into PCB0 
Perform other OS operations related to 
‗Context Switching‘  
Reload Context for Process 2 from PCB1 
Execution switches to Process 1 
(Interrupt or System Call) 
Save Current context into PCB1 
Perform other OS operations related to 
‗Context Switching‘  
Reload Context for Process 1 from PCB0 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• Co-operative Multitasking: Co-operative multitasking is the most primitive 
form of multitasking in which a task/process gets a chance to execute only 
when the currently executing task/process voluntarily relinquishes the CPU. 
In this method, any task/process can avail the CPU as much time as it wants. 
Since this type of implementation involves the mercy of the tasks each other 
for getting the CPU time for execution, it is known as co-operative 
multitasking. If the currently executing task is non-cooperative, the other 
tasks may have to wait for a long time to get the CPU 
• Preemptive Multitasking: Preemptive multitasking ensures that every 
task/process gets a chance to execute. When and how much time a process 
gets is dependent on the implementation of the preemptive scheduling. As 
the name indicates, in preemptive multitasking, the currently running 
task/process is preempted to give a chance to other tasks/process to execute. 
The preemption of task may be based on time slots or task/processpriority 
• Non-preemptive Multitasking: The process/task, which is currently given the 
CPU time, is allowed to execute until it terminates (enters the ‗Completed‘ 
state) or enters the ‗Blocked/Wait‘ state, waiting for an I/O. The co- 
operative and non-preemptive multitasking differs in their behavior when 
they are in the ‗Blocked/Wait‘ state. In co-operative multitasking, the 
currently executing process/task need not relinquish the CPU when it enters 
the ‗Blocked/Wait‘ sate, waiting for an I/O, or a shared resource access or an 
event to occur whereas in non-preemptive multitasking the currently 
executing task relinquishes the CPU when it waits for an I/O. 
Task Scheduling: 
• In a multitasking system, there should be some mechanism in place to share 
the CPU among the different tasks and to decide which process/task is to be 
executed at a given point of time 
• Determining which task/process is to be executed at a given point of time is 
known as task/process scheduling 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• Task scheduling forms the basis of multitasking 
• Scheduling policies forms the guidelines for determining which task is to be 
executed when 
• The scheduling policies are implemented in an algorithm and it is run by the 
kernel as a service 
• The kernel service/application, which implements the scheduling algorithm, 
is known as ‗Scheduler‘ 
• The task scheduling policy can be pre-emptive, non-preemptive or co- 
operative 
• Depending on the scheduling policy the process scheduling decision may 
take place when a process switches its state to 
➢ ‗Ready‘ state from ‗Running‘ state 
➢ ‗Blocked/Wait‘ state from ‗Running‘ state 
➢ ‗Ready‘ state from ‗Blocked/Wait‘ state 
➢ ‗Completed‘ state 
Task Scheduling - Scheduler Selection: 
The selection of a scheduling criteria/algorithm should consider 
• CPU Utilization: The scheduling algorithm should always make the CPU 
utilization high. CPU utilization is a direct measure of how much percentage 
of the CPU is being utilized. 
• Throughput: This gives an indication of the number of processes executed 
per unit of time. The throughput for a good scheduler should always be 
higher. 
• Turnaround Time: It is the amount of time taken by a process for 
completing its execution. It includes the time spent by the process for 
waiting for the main memory, time spent in the ready queue, time spent on 
completing the I/O operations, and the time spent in execution. The 
turnaround time should be a minimum for a good schedulingalgorithm. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
 
 Move Pr 
ss to ‗De  
Queue‘  
To summarize, a good scheduling algorithm has high CPU utilization, minimum 
Turn Around Time (TAT), maximum throughput and least response time. 
Process 1 
• Waiting Time: It is the amount of time spent by a process in the ‗Ready‘ 
queue waiting to get the CPU time for execution. The waiting time should be 
minimal for a good scheduling algorithm. 
• Response Time: It is the time elapsed between the submission of a process 
and the first response. For a good scheduling algorithm, the response time 
should be as least as possible. 
Task Scheduling - Queues 
The various queues maintained by OS in association with CPU scheduling are 
• Job Queue: Job queue contains all the processes in the system 
• Ready Queue: Contains all the processes, which are ready for execution and 
waiting for CPU to get their turn for execution. The Ready queue is empty 
when there is no process ready for running. 
• Device Queue: Contains the set of processes, which are waiting for an I/O 
device 
Task Scheduling – Task transition through various Queues 
Scheduler 
Job Queue 
Process 
 
Admitted 
Process 1 
 
 
 
ReParodcyesQs uneue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to ‗Ready‘ queue 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e 
Process 
o 
 
 
 
 
Run Processto 
Completion 
Move preempted process 
CPU 
Move I/O C ompleted Process 
to‗R eady‘ queue 
Device 
Manager 
 
 
 Process 
Process 1 
Process 2 
Figure 10. Process TranDesviicteiQouenuethrough various queues 
Resource RequestBy 
Process 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
P1 
 
P3 
 
P2 
Non-preemptive scheduling – First Come First Served (FCFS)/First In 
First Out (FIFO) Scheduling: 
• Allocates CPU time to the processes based on the order in which they enters 
the ‗Ready‘ queue 
• The first entered process is serviced first 
• It is same as any real world application where queue systems are used; E.g. 
Ticketing 
Drawbacks: 
➢ Favors monopoly of process. A process, which does not contain any I/O 
operation, continues its execution until it finishes its task 
➢ In general, FCFS favors CPU bound processes and I/O bound processes may 
have to wait until the completion of CPU bound process, if the currently 
executing process is a CPU bound process. This leads to poor device 
utilization. 
➢ The average waiting time is not minimal for FCFS scheduling algorithm 
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds respectively enters the ready queue together 
in the order P1, P2, P3. Calculate the waiting time and Turn Around Time (TAT) 
for each process and the Average waiting time and Turn Around Time (Assuming 
there is no I/O waiting for the processes). 
Solution: The sequence of execution of the processes by the CPU is represented as 
0 
10 
15 
22 
10
5
7 
 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Assuming the CPU is readily available at the time of arrival of P1, P1 starts 
executing without any waiting in the ‗Ready‘ queue. Hence the waiting time for P1 
is zero. 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 ms (P1 starts executing first) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 10 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 15 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1 and P2) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Waiting time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3 
= (0+10+15)/3 = 25/3 = 8.33 milliseconds 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 10 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + 
Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 15 ms 
(-Do-) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 22 ms 
(-Do-) 
Average Turn Around Time= (Turn Around Time for all processes) / No. of 
Processes 
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3 
= (10+15+22)/3 = 47/3 
= 15.66 milliseconds 
Non-preemptive scheduling – Last Come First Served (LCFS)/Last In 
First Out (LIFO) Scheduling: 
• Allocates CPU time to the processes based on the order in which they are 
entered in the ‗Ready‘ queue 
• The last entered process is serviced first 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• LCFS scheduling is also known as Last In First Out (LIFO) where the 
process, which is put last into the ‗Ready‘ queue, is serviced first 
Drawbacks: 
➢ Favors monopoly of process. A process, which does not contain any I/O 
operation, continues its execution until it finishes its task 
➢ In general, LCFS favors CPU bound processes and I/O bound processes may 
have to wait until the completion of CPU bound process, if the currently 
executing process is a CPU bound process. This leads to poor device 
utilization. 
➢ The average waiting time is not minimal for LCFS scheduling algorithm 
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds respectively enters the ready queue together 
in the order P1, P2, P3 (Assume only P1 is present in the ‗Ready‘ queue when the 
scheduler picks up it and P2, P3 entered ‗Ready‘ queue after that). Now a new 
process P4 with estimated completion time 6ms enters the ‗Ready‘ queue after 5ms 
of scheduling P1. Calculate the waiting time and Turn Around Time (TAT) for 
each process and the Average waiting time and Turn Around Time (Assuming 
there is no I/O waiting for the processes).Assume all the processes contain only 
CPU operation and no I/O operations are involved. 
Solution: Initially there is only P1 available in the Ready queue and the scheduling 
sequence will be P1, P3, P2. P4 enters the queue during the execution of P1 and 
becomes the last process entered the ‗Ready‘ queue. Now the order of execution 
changes to P1, P4, P3, and P2 as given below. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
P1 
P4 
P3 
P2 
0 
10 
16 
23 
28 
10
6
7
5 
 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 ms (P1 starts executing first) 
Waiting Time for P4 = 5 ms (P4 starts executing after completing P1. But P4 
arrived after 5ms of execution of P1. Hence its waiting time = Execution start time 
– Arrival Time = 10-5 = 5) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 16 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1 and P4) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 23 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1, P4 and P3) 
Average waiting time 
= (Waiting time for all processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Waiting time for (P1+P4+P3+P2)) / 4 
= (0 + 5 + 16 + 23)/4 = 44/4 
= 11 milliseconds 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 10 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P4 = 11 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + 
Execution Time = (Execution Start Time – Arrival 
Time) + Estimated Execution Time = (10-5) + 6 = 5 + 6) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 23 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 28 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Average Turn Around Time = (Turn Around Time for all processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P4+P3+P2)) / 4 
= (10+11+23+28)/4 = 72/4 
= 18 milliseconds 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Non-preemptive scheduling – Shortest Job First (SJF) Scheduling. 
• Allocates CPU time to the processes based on the execution completion time 
for tasks 
• The average waiting time for a given set of processes is minimal in SJF 
scheduling 
• Optimal compared to other non-preemptive scheduling like FCFS 
Drawbacks: 
➢ A process whose estimated execution completion time is high may not get a 
chance to execute if more and m ore processes with least estimated execution 
time enters the ‗Ready‘ queue before the process with longest estimated 
execution time starts its execution 
➢ May lead to the ‗Starvation‘ of processes with high estimated completion 
time 
➢ Difficult to know in advance the next shortest process in the ‗Ready‘ queue 
for scheduling since new processes with different estimated execution time 
keep entering the ‗Ready‘ queue at any point of time. 
Non-preemptive scheduling – Priority based Scheduling 
• A priority, which is unique or same is associated with each task 
• The priority of a task is expressed in different ways, like a priority number, 
the time required to complete the execution etc. 
• In number based priority assignment the priority is a number ranging from 0 
to the maximum priority supported by the OS. The maximum level of 
priority is OS dependent. 
• Windows CE supports 256 levels of priority (0 to 255 priority numbers, with 
0 being the highest priority) 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• The priority is assigned to the task on creating it. It can also be changed 
dynamically (If the Operating System supports this feature) 
• The non-preemptive priority based scheduler sorts the ‗Ready‘ queue based 
on the priority and picks the process with the highest level of priority for 
execution 
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds and priorities 0, 3, 2 (0- highest priority, 3 
lowest priority) respectively enters the ready queue together. Calculate the waiting 
time and Turn Around Time (TAT) for each process and the Average waiting time 
and Turn Around Time (Assuming there is no I/O waiting for the processes) in 
priority based scheduling algorithm.   
Solution: The scheduler sorts the ‗Ready‘ queue based on the priority and 
schedules the process with the highest priority (P1 with priority number 0) first and 
the next high priority process (P3 with priority number 2) as second and so on. The 
order in which the processes are scheduled for execution is represented as 
P1 
P3 
P2 
0 
10 
17 
22 
10 
7 
5 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 ms (P1 starts executing first) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 10 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 17 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1 and P3) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Waiting time for (P1+P3+P2)) / 3 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
= (0+10+17)/3 = 27/3 
= 9 milliseconds 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 10 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 17 ms 
(-Do-) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 22 ms 
(-Do-) 
Average Turn Around Time= (Turn Around Time for all processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P3+P2)) / 3 
= (10+17+22)/3 = 49/3 
= 16.33 milliseconds 
Drawbacks: 
➢ Similar to SJF scheduling algorithm, non-preemptive priority based 
algorithm also possess the drawback of ‗Starvation‘ where a process whose 
priority is low may not get a chance to execute if more and more processes 
with higher priorities enter the ‗Ready‘ queue before the process with lower 
priority starts its execution. 
➢ ‗Starvation‘ can be effectively tackled in priority based non-preemptive 
scheduling by dynamically raising the priority of the low priority 
task/process which is under starvation (waiting in the ready queue for a 
longer time for getting the CPU time) 
➢ The technique of gradually raising the priority of processes which are 
waiting in the ‗Ready‘ queue as time progresses, for preventing ‗Starvation‘, 
is known as ‗Aging‘. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Preemptive scheduling: 
• Employed in systems, which implements preemptive multitasking model 
• Every task in the ‗Ready‘ queue gets a chance to execute. When and how 
often each process gets a chance to execute (gets the CPU time) is dependent 
on the type of preemptive scheduling algorithm used for scheduling the 
processes 
• The scheduler can preempt (stop temporarily) the currently executing 
task/process and select another task from the ‗Ready‘ queue forexecution 
• When to pre-empt a task and which task is to be picked up from the ‗Ready‘ 
queue for execution after preempting the current task is purely dependent on 
the scheduling algorithm 
• A task which is preempted by the scheduler is moved to the ‗Ready‘ queue. 
The act of moving a ‗Running‘ process/task into the ‗Ready‘ queue by the 
scheduler, without the processes requesting for it is known as‗Preemption‘ 
• Time-based preemption and priority-based preemption are the two important 
approaches adopted in preemptive scheduling 
Preemptive scheduling – Preemptive SJF Scheduling/ Shortest 
Remaining 
Time (SRT): 
• The non preemptive SJF scheduling algorithm sorts the ‗Ready‘ queue only 
after the current process completes execution or enters wait state, whereas 
the preemptive SJF scheduling algorithm sorts the ‗Ready‘ queue when a 
new process enters the ‗Ready‘ queue and checks whether the execution 
time of the new process is shorter than the remaining of the total estimated 
execution time of the currently executing process 
• If the execution time of the new process is less, the currently executing 
process is preempted and the new process is scheduled for execution 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• Always compares the execution completion time (ie the remaining execution 
time for the new process) of a new process entered the ‗Ready‘ queue with 
the remaining time for completion of the currently executing process and 
schedules the process with shortest remaining time for execution. 
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds respectively enters the ready queue together. 
A new process P4 with estimated completion time 2ms enters the ‗Ready‘ queue 
after 2ms. Assume all the processes contain only CPU operation and no I/O 
operations are involved. 
Solution: At the beginning, there are only three processes (P1, P2 and P3) 
available in the ‗Ready‘ queue and the SRT scheduler picks up the process with the 
Shortest remaining time for execution completion (In this example P2 with 
remaining time 5ms) for scheduling. Now process P4 with estimated execution 
completion time 2ms enters the ‗Ready‘ queue after 2ms of start of execution of 
P2. The processes are re-scheduled for execution in the following order 
P2 
P4 
P2 
P3 
P1 
0 
2 
4 
7 
14 
24 
2 
2 
3 
7 
10 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P2 = 0 ms + (4 -2) ms = 2ms 
(P2 starts executing first and is 
interrupted by P4 and has to wait till the completion of 
P4 to get the next CPU slot) 
Waiting Time for P4 = 0 ms 
(P4 starts executing by preempting P2 since the 
execution time for completion of P4 (2ms) is less 
than that of the Remaining time for execution 
completion of P2 (Here it is 3ms)) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 7 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P4 and P2) 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Waiting Time for P1 = 14 ms (P1 starts executing after completing P4, P2 and P3) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all the processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Waiting time for (P4+P2+P3+P1)) / 4 
= (0 + 2 + 7 + 14)/4 = 23/4 
= 5.75 milliseconds 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 7 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P4 = 2 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time = (Execution Start Time – Arrival 
Time) + Estimated Execution Time = (2-2) + 2) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 14 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + 
Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 24 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + 
Execution Time) 
Average Turn Around Time 
= (Turn Around Time for all the processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Turn Around Time for (P2+P4+P3+P1)) / 4 
= (7+2+14+24)/4 = 47/4 
= 11.75 milliseconds 
Preemptive scheduling – Round Robin (RR) 
Scheduling: 
 
 
 
Execution Switch 
Process 1  
 
 
Execution Switch 
• Each process in the ‗Ready‘ queue is 
executed for a pre-defined time slot. 
 
 
Process 4 
Process 2 
• The execution starts with picking up the first 
process in the ‗Ready‘ queue. It is executed for a 
pre-defined time 
 
 
Execution Switch 
 
 
 
 
 
Process 3 
 
Execution Switch 
Figure 11 Round Robin Scheduling 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• When the pre-defined time elapses or the process completes (before the pre- 
defined time slice), the next process in the ‗Ready‘ queue is selected for 
execution. 
• This is repeated for all the processes in the ‗Ready‘ queue 
• Once each process in the ‗Ready‘ queue is executed for the pre-defined time 
period, the scheduler comes back and picks the first process in the ‗Ready‘ 
queue again for execution. 
• Round Robin scheduling is similar to the FCFS scheduling and the only 
difference is that a time slice based preemption is added to switch the 
execution between the processes in the ‗Ready‘ queue 
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 6, 4, 2 milliseconds respectively, enters the ready queue together 
in the order P1, P2, P3. Calculate the waiting time and Turn Around Time (TAT) 
for each process and the Average waiting time and Turn Around Time (Assuming 
there is no I/O waiting for the processes) in RR algorithm with Time slice= 2ms. 
Solution: The scheduler sorts the ‗Ready‘ queue based on the FCFS policy and 
picks up the first process P1 from the ‗Ready‘ queue and executes it for the time 
slice 2ms. When the time slice is expired, P1 is preempted and P2 is scheduled for 
execution. The Time slice expires after 2ms of execution of P2. Now P2 is 
preempted and P3 is picked up for execution. P3 completes its execution within the 
time slice and the scheduler picks P1 again for execution for the next time slice. 
This procedure is repeated till all the processes are serviced. The order in which the 
processes are scheduled for execution is represented as 
P1 
P2 
P3 
P1 
P2 
P1 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
2
 2
 2
 2
 2
 2 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 + (6-2) + (10-8) = 0+4+2= 6ms (P1 starts executing first 
and waits for two time slices to get execution back and 
again 1 time slice for getting CPU time) 
Waiting Time for P2 = (2-0) + (8-4) = 2+4 = 6ms (P2 starts executing after P1 
executes for 1 time slice and waits for two time 
slices to get the CPU time) 
Waiting Time for P3 = (4 -0) = 4ms (P3 starts executing after completing the first 
time slices for P1 and P2 and completes its execution in a single time slice.) 
Average waiting time 
= (Waiting time for all the processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Waiting time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3 
= (6+6+4)/3 = 16/3 
= 5.33 milliseconds 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 12 ms 
(Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 10 ms 
(-Do-) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 6 ms 
(-Do-) 
Average Turn Around Time 
= (Turn Around Time for all the processes) / No. of 
Processes 
= (Turn Around Time for (P1+P2+P3)) / 3 
= (12+10+6)/3 = 28/3 
= 9.33 milliseconds. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Preemptive scheduling – Priority based Scheduling 
• Same as that of the non-preemptive priority based scheduling except for the 
switching of execution between tasks 
• In preemptive priority based scheduling, any high priority process entering 
the ‗Ready‘ queue is immediately scheduled for execution whereas in the 
non-preemptive scheduling any high priority process entering the ‗Ready‘ 
queue is scheduled only after the currently executing process completes its 
execution or only when it voluntarily releases the CPU 
• The priority of a task/process in preemptive priority based scheduling is 
indicated in the same way as that of the mechanisms adopted for non- 
preemptive multitasking. 
EXAMPLE: Three processes with process IDs P1, P2, P3 with estimated 
completion time 10, 5, 7 milliseconds and priorities 1, 3, 2 (0- highest priority, 3 
lowest priority) respectively enters the ready queue together. A new process P4 
with estimated completion time 6ms and priority 0 enters the ‗Ready‘ queue after 
5ms of start of execution of P1. Assume all the processes contain only CPU 
operation and no I/O operations are involved. 
Solution: At the beginning, there are only three processes (P1, P2 and P3) 
available in the ‗Ready‘ queue and the scheduler picks up the process with the 
highest priority (In this example P1 with priority 1) for scheduling. Now process 
P4 with estimated execution completion time 6ms and priority 0 enters the ‗Ready‘ 
queue after 5ms of start of execution of P1. The processes are re-scheduled for 
execution in the following order 
P1 
P4 
P1 
P3 
P2 
0 
5 
11 
16 
5
6
5
7 
23 
28 
5 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
The waiting time for all the processes are given as 
Waiting Time for P1 = 0 + (11-5) = 0+6 =6 ms (P1 starts executing first and gets 
Preempted by P4 after 5ms and again gets the CPU time 
after completion of P4) 
Waiting Time for P4 = 0 ms (P4 starts executing immediately on entering the 
‗Ready‘ queue, by preempting P1) 
Waiting Time for P3 = 16 ms (P3 starts executing after completing P1 and P4) 
Waiting Time for P2 = 23 ms (P2 starts executing after completing P1, P4 and P3) 
Average waiting time = (Waiting time for all the processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Waiting time for (P1+P4+P3+P2)) / 4 
= (6 + 0 + 16 + 23)/4 = 45/4 
= 11.25 milliseconds 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P1 = 16 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P4 = 6ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time 
= (Execution Start Time – Arrival Time) + Estimated Execution Time = (5-5) + 6 = 0 + 6) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P3 = 23 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Turn Around Time (TAT) for P2 = 28 ms (Time spent in Ready Queue + Execution Time) 
Average Turn Around Time= (Turn Around Time for all the processes) / No. of Processes 
= (Turn Around Time for (P2+P4+P3+P1)) / 4 
= (16+6+23+28)/4 = 73/4 
= 18.25 milliseconds 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
How to chose RTOS: 
 The decision of an RTOS for an embedded design is very critical. 
 A lot of factors need to be analyzed carefully before making a decision on 
the selection of an RTOS. 
These factors can be either 
1. Functional 
2. Non-functional requirements. 
1. Functional Requirements: 
1. Processor support: 
It is not necessary that all RTOS‘s support all kinds of processor 
architectures. 
It is essential to ensure the processor support by the RTOS 
2. Memory Requirements: 
• The RTOS requires ROM memory for holding the OS files and it is 
normally stored in a non-volatile memory like FLASH. 
OS also requires working memory RAM for loading the OS service. 
Since embedded systems are memory constrained, it is essential to evaluate 
the minimal RAM and ROM requirements for the OS under consideration. 
3. Real-Time Capabilities: 
 It is not mandatory that the OS for all embedded systems need to be Real- 
Time and all embedded OS‘s are ‗Real-Time‘ in behavior. 
 The Task/process scheduling policies plays an important role in the Real- 
Time behavior of an OS. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
3. Kernel and Interrupt Latency: 
 The kernel of the OS may disable interrupts while executing certain services 
and it may lead to interrupt latency. 
 For an embedded system whose response requirements are high, this latency 
should be minimal. 
5. Inter process Communication (IPC) and Task Synchronization: The 
implementation of IPC and Synchronization is OS kernel dependent. 
6. Modularization Support: 
Most of the OS‘s provide a bunch of features. 
It is very useful if the OS supports modularization where in which the 
developer can choose the essential modules and re-compile the OS image for 
functioning. 
7. Support for Networking and Communication: 
The OS kernel may provide stack implementation and driver support for a 
bunch of communication interfaces and networking. 
Ensure that the OS under consideration provides support for all the 
interfaces required by the embedded product. 
8. Development Language Support: 
Certain OS‘s include the run time libraries required for running applications 
written in languages like JAVA and C++. 
The OS may include these components as built-in component, if not , check 
the availability of the same from a third party. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
2. Non-Functional Requirements: 
1. Custom Developed or Off the Shelf: 
 
 It is possible to go for the complete development of an OS suiting the 
embedded system needs or use an off the shelf, readily availableOS. 
It may be possible to build the required features by customizing an open 
source OS. 
The decision on which to select is purely dependent on the development 
cost, licensing fees for the OS, development time and availability of skilled 
resources. 
2. Cost: 
The total cost for developing or buying the OS and maintaining it in terms of 
commercial product and custom build needs to be evaluated before taking a 
decision on the selection of OS. 
3. Development and Debugging tools Availability: 
The availability of development and debugging tools is a critical decision 
making factor in the selection of an OS for embedded design. 
Certain OS‘s may be superior in performance, but the availability of tools 
for supporting the development may be limited. 
4. Ease of Use: 
How easy it is to use a commercial RTOS is another important feature that 
needs to be considered in the RTOS selection. 
5. After Sales: 
 
 For a commercial embedded RTOS, after sales in the form of e-mail, on-call 
services etc. for bug fixes, critical patch updates and support for production 
issues etc. should be analyzed thoroughly. 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
Hardware 
Device Drivers: 
• Device driver is a piece of software that acts as a bridge between the 
operating system and the hardware 
• The user applications talk to the OS kernel for all necessary information 
exchange including communication with the hardware peripherals 
• The architecture of the OS kernel will not allow direct device access from 
the user application 
• All the device related access should flow through the OS kernel and the OS 
kernel routes it to the concerned hardware peripheral 
• OS Provides interfaces in the form of Application Programming Interfaces 
(APIs) for accessing the hardware 
• The device driver abstracts the hardware from user applications 

ES Unit-4 Notes 
• Device 
drivers 
are 
responsible 
for initiating 
and 
managing 
the 
communication with the hardware peripherals 
• Drivers which comes as part of the Operating system image is known as 
‗built-in drivers‘ or ‗onboard‘ drivers. Eg. NAND FLASH driver 
• Drivers which needs to be installed on the fly for communicating with add- 
on devices are known as ‗Installable drivers‘ 
• For installable drivers, the driver is loaded on a need basis when the device 
is present and it is unloaded when the device is removed/detached 
• The ‗Device Manager service of the OS kernel is responsible for loading 
and unloading the driver, managing the driver etc. 
• The underlying implementation of device driver is OS kernel dependent 
• The driver communicates with the kernel is dependent on the OS structure 
and implementation. 
• Device drivers can run on either user space or kernel space 
• Device drivers which run in user space are known as user mode drivers and 
the drivers which run in kernel space are known as kernel modedrivers 
• User mode drivers are safer than kernel mode drivers 
• If an error or exception occurs in a user mode driver, it won‘t affect the 
services of the kernel 
• If an exception occurs in the kernel mode driver, it may lead to the kernel 
crash 
• The way how a device driver is written and how the interrupts are handled in 
it are Operating system and target hardware specific. 
• The device driver implements the following: 
• Device (Hardware) Initialization and Interrupt configuration 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
• Interrupt handling and processing 
• Client interfacing (Interfacing with user applications) 
• The basic Interrupt configuration involves the following. 
• Set the interrupt type (Edge Triggered (Rising/Falling) or Level Triggered 
(Low or High)), enable the interrupts and set the interrupt priorities. 
• The processor identifies an interrupt through IRQ. 
• 
IRQs are generated by the Interrupt Controller. 
• Register an Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) with an Interrupt Request (IRQ). 
• When an interrupt occurs, depending on its priority, it is serviced and the 
corresponding ISR is invoked 
• The processing part of an interrupt is handled in an ISR 
• The whole interrupt processing can be done by the ISR itself or by invoking 
an Interrupt Service Thread (IST) 
• The IST performs interrupt processing on behalf of the ISR 
• It is always advised to use an IST for interrupt processing, to make the ISR 
compact and short 
Reference Books: 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill 
2. Embedded System Design-Raj Kamal TMH 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGN 
IV YEAR ECE (R18) 
UNIT-V 
COMMUNICATION INTERFACE 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
Communication Interface: 
• Communication interface is essential for communicating with various subsystems of the 
embedded system and with the external world 
• The communication interface can be viewed in two different perspectives; namely; 
1. Device/board level communication interface (Onboard Communication Interface) 
2. Product level communication interface (External Communication Interface) 
1. Device/board level communication interface (Onboard Communication Interface): 
The communication channel which interconnects the various components within an 
embedded product is referred as Device/board level communication interface (Onboard 
Communication Interface) 
➢ Examples: Serial interfaces like I2C, SPI, UART, 1-Wire etc and Parallel bus interface 
2. Product level communication interface (External Communication Interface): 
The „Product level communication interface‟ (External Communication Interface) is 
responsible for data transfer between the embedded system and other devices or modules. The 
external communication interface can be either wired media or wireless media and it can be a 
serial or parallel interface. 
➢ Examples for wireless communication interface: Infrared (IR), Bluetooth (BT), Wireless 
LAN (Wi-Fi), Radio Frequency waves (RF), GPRS etc. 
➢ Examples for wired interfaces: RS-232C/RS-422/RS 485, USB, Ethernet (TCP-IP), IEEE 
1394 port, Parallel port etc. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
 
1. Device/board level or On board communication interfaces: The 
Communication channel which interconnects the various components within an embedded 
product is referred as Device/board level communication interface (Onboard Communication 
Interface) 
These are classified into 
I2C (Inter Integrated Circuit) Bus 
SPI (Serial Peripheral Interface) Bus 
UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter) 
1-Wires Interface 
Parallel Interface 
1 
I2C (Inter Integrated Circuit) Bus: 
Inter Integrated Circuit Bus (I2C - Pronounced „I square C‟) is a synchronous bi-directional half 
duplex (one-directional communication at a given point of time) two wire serial interface 
bus.The concept of I2C bus was developed by „Philips Semiconductors‟ in the early 1980‟s. The 
original intention of I2C was to provide an easy way of connection between a 
microprocessor/microcontroller system and the peripheral chips in Television sets. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
The I2C bus is comprised of two bus lines, namely; Serial Clock – SCL and Serial Data – SDA. 
SCL line is responsible for generating synchronization clock pulses and SDA is 
responsible for transmitting the serial data across devices.I2C bus is a shared bus system to 
which many number of I2C devices can be connected. Devices connected to the I2C bus can act 
as either „Master‟ device or „Slave‟ device. 
The „Master‟ device is responsible for controlling the communication by 
initiating/terminating data transfer, sending data and generating necessary synchronization clock 
pulses. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
Slave devices wait for the commands from the master and respond upon receiving the 
commands. Master and „Slave‟ devices can act as either transmitter or receiver. Regardless 
whether a master is acting as transmitter or receiver, the synchronization clock signal is 
generated by the „Master‟ device only.I2C supports multi masters on the same bus. 
The sequence of operation for communicating with an I2C slave device is: 
1. Master device pulls the clock line (SCL) of the bus to „HIGH‟ 
2. Master device pulls the data line (SDA) „LOW‟, when the SCL line is at logic 
„HIGH‟ (This is the „Start‟ condition for data transfer) 
3. Master sends the address (7 bit or 10 bit wide) of the „Slave‟ device to which it wants to 
communicate, over the SDA line. 
4. Clock pulses are generated at the SCL line for synchronizing the bit reception bythe 
slave device. 
5. The MSB of the data is always transmitted first. 
6. The data in the bus is valid during the „HIGH‟ period of the clock signal 
7. In normal data transfer, the data line only changes state when the clock is low. 
8. Master waits for the acknowledgement bit from the slave device whose address is sent on 
the bus along with the Read/Write operation command. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
9. Slave devices connected to the bus compares the address received with the address 
assigned to them 
10. The Slave device with the address requested by the master device responds by sending an 
acknowledge bit (Bit value =1) over the SDA line 
11. Upon receiving the acknowledge bit, master sends the 8bit data to the slave device over 
SDA line, if the requested operation is „Write to device‟. 
12. If the requested operation is „Read from device‟, the slave device sends data to the 
master over the SDA line. 
13. Master waits for the acknowledgement bit from the device upon byte transfer complete 
for a write operation and sends an acknowledge bit to the slave device for a read 
operation 
14. Master terminates the transfer by pulling the SDA line „HIGH‟ when the clock line SCL 
is at logic „HIGH‟ (Indicating the „STOP‟ condition). 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
 
Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) Bus: 
The Serial Peripheral Interface Bus (SPI) is a synchronous bi-directional full duplex four wire 
serial interface bus. The concept of SPI is introduced by Motorola.SPI is a single master multi- 
slave system. 
➢ 
It is possible to have a system where more than one SPI device can be master, provided 
➢ the condition only one master device is active at any given point of time, is satisfied. 
SPI is used to send data between Microcontrollers and small peripherals such as shift 
registers, sensors, and SD cards. 
SPI requires four signal lines for communication. They are: 
Master Out Slave In (MOSI): Signal line carrying the data from master to slave device. It is 
also known as Slave Input/Slave Data In (SI/SDI) 
Master In Slave Out (MISO): Signal line carrying the data from slave to master device. It is 
also known as Slave Output (SO/SDO) 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
Serial Clock (SCLK): Signal line carrying the clock signals 
Slave Select (SS): Signal line for slave device select. It is an active low signal. 
The master device is responsible for generating the clock signal. 
Master device selects the required slave device by asserting the corresponding slave devices 
slave select signal „LOW‟. 
➢ The data out line (MISO) of all the slave devices when not selected floats at high impedance 
state 
➢ The serial data transmission through SPI Bus is fully configurable. 
➢ SPI devices contain certain set of registers for holding these configurations. 
➢ The Serial Peripheral Control Register holds the various configuration parameters like 
master/slave selection for the device, baudrate selection for communication, clock signal 
control etc. 
➢ The status register holds the status of various conditions for transmission and reception.SPI 
works on the principle of „Shift Register‟. 
➢ The master and slave devices contain a special shift register for the data to transmit or 
receive. 
➢ The size of the shift register is device dependent. Normally it is a multiple of 8. 
➢ During transmission from the master to slave, the data in the master‟s shift register is 
shifted out to the MOSI pin and it enters the shift register of the slave device through the 
MOSI pin of the slave device. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
➢ At the same time the shifted out data bit from the slave device‘s shift register enters the 
shift register of the master device through MISO pin 
I2C V/S SPI: 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
1-wire interface (protocol) 
1-  Wire is a device communications bus system designed by Dallas Semiconductor Corp. that 
provides low-speed data, signaling, and power over a single conductor. 
1-Wire is similar in concept to I²C, but with lower data rates and longer range. It is typically used 
to communicate with small inexpensive devices such as digital thermometers and weather 
instruments. 
One distinctive feature of the bus is the possibility of using only two wires: data and ground. 
To accomplish this, 1-Wire devices include an 800 pF capacitor to store charge, and to power the 
device during periods when the data line isactive 
There is always one master in overall charge, which may be a PC or a microcontroller. 
The master initiates activity on the bus, simplifying the avoidance of collisions on the bus. 
Protocols are built into the software to detect collisions. After a collision, the master retries the 
required communication. 
Many devices can share the same bus. Each device on the bus has a unique 64-bit serial 
number. The least significant byte of the serial number is an 8-bit number that tells the type of 
the device. The most significant byte is a standard (for the 1-wire bus) 8-bit CRC. 
The master starts a transmission with a reset pulse, which pulls the wire to 0 volts for at least 480 
µs. This resets every slave device on the bus. After that, any slave device, if present, shows that 
it exists with a "presence" pulse: it holds the bus low for at least 60 µs after the master releases 
the bus. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
To send a "1", the bus master sends a very brief (1– 15 µs) low pulse. To send a "0", the 
master sends a 60 µs low pulse.When receiving data, the master start sends a 1–15-µs 0-volt 
pulse to slave each bit. If the transmitting does unit wants to send a "1", it to the nothing, and the 
bus goes transmitting pulled-up voltage. If the "0", it pulls slave wants to send the data line to 
ground for 60 µs. 
PARALLEL COMMUNICATION: 
In data transmission, parallel communication is a method of conveying multiple binary 
digits (bits) simultaneously. It contrasts with communication. The communication channel is the 
number of electrical conductors used at the physical layer to convey bits. 
Parallel communication implies more than one such conductor. For example, an 8-bit 
parallel channel will convey eight bits (or a byte) simultaneously, whereas a serial channel would 
convey those same bits sequentially, one at a time. Parallel communication is and always has 
been widely used within integrated circuits, in peripheral buses, and in memory devices such as 
RAM. 
2. 
Product level communication interface (External Communication 
Interface): The Product level communication interface‟ (External Communication Interface) is 
responsible for data transfer between the embedded system and other devices or modules 
It is classified into two types 
1. Wired communication interface 
2. Wireless communication interface: 
1. Wired communication interface: Wired communication interface is an interface used to 
transfer information over a wired network. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
It is classified into following types. 
1. RS-232C/RS-422/RS 485 
2. USB 
RS-232C: 
➢ RS-232 C (Recommended Standard number 232, revision C from the Electronic Industry 
Association) is a legacy, full duplex, wired, asynchronous serial communication interface 
➢ RS-232 extends the UART communication signals for external data communication. 
➢ UART uses the standard TTL/CMOS logic (Logic „High‟ corresponds to bit value 1 and 
Logic „LOW‟ corresponds to bit value 0) for bit transmission whereas RS232 use the 
EIA standard for bit transmission. 
➢ As per EIA standard, a logic „0‟ is represented with voltage between +3 and +25V and a 
logic „1‟ is represented with voltage between -3 and -25V. 
➢ In EIA standard, logic „0‟ is known as „Space‟ and logic „1‟ as „Mark‟. 
The RS232 interface define various handshaking and control signals for communication 
apart from the „Transmit‟ and „Receive‟ signal lines for data communication 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
RS-232 supports two different types of connectors, namely; DB-9: 9-Pin connector and DB-25: 
25-Pin connector. 
Fig: DB-25:25-Pin connector. 
Fig: DB-9:9-Pin connector. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
 
➢ RS-232 is a point-to-point communication interface and the devices involved in RS-232 
communication are called „Data Terminal Equipment (DTE)‟ and „Data Communication 
Equipment (DCE)‟. 
➢ If no data flow control is required, only TXD and RXD signal lines and ground line (GND) 
are required for data transmission and reception. 
➢ The RXD pin of DCE should be connected to the TXD pin of DTE and vice versa for proper 
data transmission. 
➢ If hardware data flow control is required for serial transmission, various control signal lines 
of the RS-232 connection are used appropriately. 
➢ The control signals are implemented mainly for modem communication and some of them 
may be irrelevant for other type of devices. 
➢ The Request to Send (RTS) and Clear To Send (CTS) signals co-ordinate the communication 
between DTE and DCE. 
➢ Whenever the DTE has a data to send, it activates the RTS line and if the DCE is ready to 
accept the data, it activates the CTS line. 
➢ The Data Terminal Ready (DTR) signal is activated by DTE when it is ready to accept data. 
➢ The Data Set Ready (DSR) is activated by DCE when it is ready for establishing a 
communication link. 
➢ DTR should be in the activated state before the activation of DSR. 
➢ The Data Carrier Detect (DCD) is used by the DCE to indicate the DTE that a good signal is 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
being received. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
➢ Ring Indicator (RI) is a modem specific signal line for indicating an incoming call on the 
telephone line. 
➢ As per the EIA standard RS-232 C supports baudrates up to 20Kbps (Upper limit 19.2Kbps). 
➢ The commonly used baudrates by devices are 300bps, 1200bps, 2400bps, 9600bps, 
11.52Kbps and 19.2Kbps. 
➢ The maximum operating distance supported in RS-232 communication is 50 feet at the 
highest supported baudrate. 
➢ Embedded devices contain a UART for serial communication and they generate signal levels 
conforming to TTL/CMOS logic. 
➢ A level translator IC like MAX 232 from Maxim Dallas semiconductor is used for converting 
the signal lines from the UART to RS-232 signal lines for communication. 
➢ On the receiving side the received data is converted back to digital logic level by a converter 
IC. 
➢ Converter chips contain converters for both transmitter and receiver. 
➢ RS-232 uses single ended data transfer and supports only point-to-point communication and 
not suitable for multi-drop communication. 
USB (UNIVERSAL SERIAL BUS): 
• External Bus Standard. 
• Allows connection of peripheral devices. 
• Connects Devices such as keyboards, mice, scanners, printers, joysticks, audio 
devices, disks. 
• Facilitates transfers of data at 480 (USB 2.0 only), 12 or 1.5 Mb/s (mega- 
bits/second). 
• Developed by a Special Interest Group including Intel, Microsoft, Compact, DEC, 
IBM, Northern Telecom and NEC originally in 1994. 
• Low-Speed: 10 – 100 kb/s 
• 1.5 Mb/s signaling bit rate 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
• Full-Speed: 500 kb/s – 10 Mb/s 12 Mb/s signaling bit rate 
• High-Speed: 400 Mb/s 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
• 480 Mb/s signaling bit rate 
• NRZI with bit stuffing used 
• SYNC field present for everypacket 
• There exist two pre-defined connectors in any USB system - Series ―A‖ and Series ―B‖ 
Connectors. 
• Series ―A‖ cable: Connects USB devices to a hub port. 
• Series ―B‖ cable: Connects detachable devices (hot- swappable) 
Bus Topology: 
➢ Connects computer to peripheral devices. 
➢ Ultimately intended to replace parallel and serial ports 
➢ Tiered Star Topology 
➢ All devices are linked to a common point referred to as the root hub. 
7 
➢ Specification allows for up to 127 (2 -1) different devices. 
➢ Four wire cable serves as interconnect of system - power, ground and two differential 
signaling lines. 
➢ USB is a polled bus-all transactions are initiated by host. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
USB HOST: Device that controls entire system usually a PC of some form. Processes data 
arriving to and from the USB port. 
USB HUB: Tests for new devices and maintains status information of child devices.Serve as 
repeaters, boosting strength of up and downstream signals. Electrically isolates devices from one 
another - allowing an expanded number of devices. 
2. Wireless communication interface : Wireless communication interface is an interface used to 
transmission of information over a distance without help of wires, cables or any other forms of 
electrical conductors. 
They are basically classified into following types 
1. 
Infrared 
2. 
Bluetooth 
3. 
Wi-Fi 
4. 
Zigbee 
5. GPRS 
INFRARED: 
• Infrared is a certain region in the light spectrum 
• Ranges from .7µ to 1000µ or .1mm 
• Broken into near, mid, and far infrared 
• One step up on the light spectrum from visible light 
• Measure of heat 
Most of the thermal radiation emitted by objects near room temperature is infrared. Infrared 
radiation is used in industrial, scientific, and medical applications. Night-vision devices using 
active near-infrared illumination allow people or animals to be observed without the observer 
being detected. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
 
IR transmission: 
The transmitter of an IR LED inside its circuit, which emits infrared light for every electric pulse 
given to it. This pulse is generated as a button on the remote is pressed, thus completing the 
circuit, providing bias to the LED. 
The LED on being biased emits light of the wavelength of 940nm as a series of pulses, 
corresponding to the button pressed. However since along with the IR LED many other sources 
of infrared light such as us human beings, light bulbs, sun, etc, the transmitted information can be 
interfered. A solution to this problem is by modulation. The transmitted signal is modulated using 
a carrier frequency of 38 KHz (or any other frequency between 36 to 46 KHz). The IR LED is 
made to oscillate at this frequency for the time duration of the pulse. The information or the light 
signals are pulse width modulated and are contained in the 38 KHz frequency. 
IR supports data rates ranging from 9600bits/second to 16Mbps 
Serial infrared: 9600bps to 115.2 kbps 
Medium infrared: 0.576Mbps to 1.152 Mbps 
Fast infrared: 4Mbps 
BLUETOOTH: 
Bluetooth is a wireless technology standard for short distances (using short-wavelength UHF 
band from 2.4 to 2.485 GHz)for exchanging data over radio waves in the ISM and mobile 
devices, and building personal area networks (PANs).Invented by telecom vendor Ericsson in 
1994, it was originally conceived as a wireless alternative to RS- 232 data cables. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
Bluetooth uses a radio technology called frequency- hopping spread spectrum. Bluetooth 
divides transmitted data into packets, and transmits each packet on one of 79 designated 
Bluetooth channels. Each channel has a bandwidth of 1 MHz. It usually performs 800 hops per 
second, with Adaptive Frequency-Hopping (AFH) enabled 
Originally, Gaussian frequency-shift keying (GFSK) modulation was the only modulation 
scheme available. Since the introduction of Bluetooth 2.0+EDR, π/4-DQPSK (Differential 
Quadrature Phase Shift Keying) and 8DPSK modulation may also be used between compatible 
devices. Bluetooth is a packet-based protocol with a master- slave structure. One master may 
communicate with up to seven slaves in a piconet. All devices share the master's clock. Packet 
exchange is based on the basic clock, defined by the master, which ticks at312.5 µs intervals. 
A master BR/EDR Bluetooth device can communicate with a maximum of seven devices 
in a piconet (an ad-hoc computer network using Bluetooth technology), though not all devices 
reach this maximum. The devices can switch roles, by agreement, and the slave can become the 
master (for example, a headset initiating a connection to a phone necessarily begins as master— 
as initiator of the connection—but may subsequently operate as slave). 
Wi-Fi: 
➢ Wi-Fi is the name of a popular wireless networking technology that uses radio waves to 
provide wireless high-speed Internet and network connections 
➢ Wi-Fi follows the IEEE 802.11 standard 
➢ Wi-Fi is intended for network communication and it supports Internet Protocol (IP) based 
communication 
➢ Wi-Fi based communications require an intermediate agent called Wi-Fi router/Wireless 
Access point to manage the communications. 
➢ The Wi-Fi router is responsible for restricting the access to a network, assigning IP address to 
devices on the network, routing data packets to the intended devices on the network. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
 
➢ Wi-Fi enabled devices contain a wireless adaptor for transmitting and receiving data in 
the form of radio signals through an antenna. 
➢ Wi-Fi operates at 2.4GHZ or 5GHZ of radio spectrum and they co-exist with other ISM 
band devices like Bluetooth. 
➢ A Wi-Fi network is identified with a Service Set Identifier (SSID). A Wi-Fi device can 
connect to a network by selecting the SSID of the network and by providing the 
credentials if the network is security enabled 
➢ Wi-Fi networks implements different security mechanisms for authentication and data 
transfer. 
➢ Wireless Equivalency Protocol (WEP), Wireless Protected Access (WPA) etc are some of 
the security mechanisms supported by Wi-Fi networks in data communication. 
ZIGBEE: 
Zigbee is an IEEE 802.15.4-based specification for a suite of high- level communication 
protocols used to create personal area networks with small, low-power digital radios, such as for 
home automation, medical device data collection, and other low-power low-bandwidth needs, 
designed for small scale projects which need wireless connection.Hence, zigbee is a low-power, 
low data rate, and close proximity (i.e., personal area) wireless ad hoc network.The technology 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
defined by the zigbee specification is intended to be simpler and less expensive than other 
wireless personal area networks (WPANs), such as Bluetooth or Wi-Fi . Applications include 
wireless light switches, electrical meters with in-home-displays, traffic management systems, and 
other consumer and industrial equipment that require short-range low- rate wireless data transfer. 
Its low power consumption limits transmission distances to 10– 100 meters line-of-sight, 
depending on power output and environmental characteristics. Zigbee devices can transmit data 
over long distances by passing data through a mesh network of intermediate devices to reach 
more distant ones. 
Zigbee Coordinator: The zigbee coordinator acts as the root of the zigbee network. The ZC is 
responsible for initiating the Zigbee network and it has the capability to store information about 
the network. 
Zigbee Router: Responsible for passing information from device to another device or to another 
ZR. 
Zigbee end device:End device containing zigbee functionality for data communication. It can 
talk only with a ZR or ZC and doesn‘t have the capability to act as a mediator for transferring 
data from one device to another. 
Zigbee supports an operating distance of up to 100 metres at a data rate of 20 to 250 Kbps. 

MRCET ECE 
ESD UNIT-5 NOTES 
General Packet Radio Service(GPRS): 
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) is a packet oriented mobile data service on the 2G and 
3G cellular communication system's global system for mobile communications (GSM).GPRS 
was originally standardized by European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) GPRS 
usage is typically charged based on volume of data transferred, contrasting with circuit switched 
data, which is usually billed per minute of connection time. Sometimes billing time is broken 
down to every third of a minute. Usage above the bundle cap is charged per megabyte, speed 
limited, or disallowed. 
Services offered: 
➢ GPRS extends the GSM Packet circuit switched data capabilities and makes the 
following services possible: 
➢ SMS messaging and broadcasting 
➢ "Always on" internet access 
➢ Multimedia messaging service (MMS) 
➢ Push-to-talk over cellular (PoC) 
➢ Instant messaging and presence-wireless village Internet applications for smart devices 
through wireless application protocol(WAP). 
➢ Point-to-point (P2P) service: inter-networking with the Internet (IP). 
➢ Point-to-multipoint (P2M) service]: point-to- multipoint multicast and point-to-multipoint 
group calls. 
Text Book:- 
1. Introduction to Embedded Systems – Shibu K.V Mc Graw Hill 

